BLOOM: A 176B-Parameter Open-Access Multilingual
Language Model
BigScience Workshop∗
Major Contributors
Teven Le Scao, Angela Fan, Christopher Akiki, Ellie Pavlick, Suzana Ili´ c, Daniel Hesslow, Roman
Castagné, Alexandra Sasha Luccioni, Fran¸ cois Yvon, Matthias Gallé, Jonathan Tow, Alexander M.
Rush, Stella Biderman, Albert Webson, Pawan Sasanka Ammanamanchi, Thomas Wang, Benoˆ ıt
Sagot, Niklas Muennighoff, Albert Villanova del Moral, Olatunji Ruwase, Rachel Bawden, Stas
Bekman, AngelinaMcMillan-Major, ThomasWolf, IzBeltagy, HuuNguyen, LucileSaulnier, Samson
Tan, Pedro Ortiz Suarez, Victor Sanh, Hugo Lauren¸ con, Yacine Jernite, Julien Launay, Margaret
Mitchell, Colin Raffel
Dataset
Aaron Gokaslan, Adi Simhi, Aitor Soroa, Albert Villanova del Moral, Alexandra Sasha Luccioni,
Alham Fikri Aji, Amit Alfassy, Angelina McMillan-Major, Anna Rogers, Ariel Kreisberg Nitzav,
Canwen Xu, Chenghao Mou, Chris Emezue, Christopher Akiki, Christopher Klamm, Colin Leong,
Colin Raffel, Daniel van Strien, David Ifeoluwa Adelani, Dragomir Radev, Eduardo González Pon-
ferrada, Efrat Levkovizh, Ethan Kim, Eyal Bar Natan, Francesco De Toni, Gérard Dupont, Germán
Kruszewski, Giada Pistilli, Hady Elsahar, Hamza Benyamina, Hieu Tran, Hugo Lauren¸ con, Huu
Nguyen, Ian Yu, Idris Abdulmumin, Isaac Johnson, Itziar Gonzalez-Dios, Javier de la Rosa, Jenny
Chim, Jesse Dodge, Jian Zhu, Jonathan Chang, J¨ org Frohberg, Joseph Tobing, Joydeep Bhattachar-
jee, KhalidAlmubarak, KimboChen, KyleLo, LeandroVonWerra, LeonWeber, LongPhan, Loubna
Ben allal, Lucile Saulnier, Ludovic Tanguy, Manan Dey, Manuel Romero Mu˜ noz, Maraim Masoud,
Margaret Mitchell, María Grandury, Mario ˇSaˇ sko, Max Huang, Maximin Coavoux, Mayank Singh,
Mike Tian-Jian Jiang, Minh Chien Vu, Mohammad A. Jauhar, Mustafa Ghaleb, Nishant Subramani,
Nora Kassner, Nurulaqilla Khamis, Olivier Nguyen, Omar Espejel, Ona de Gibert, Paulo Villegas,
Pawan Sasanka Ammanamanchi, Pedro Ortiz Suarez, Peter Henderson, Pierre Colombo, Priscilla
Amuok, Quentin Lhoest, Rheza Harliman, Rishi Bommasani, Roberto Luis López, Roman Castagné,
Rui Ribeiro, Salomey Osei, Sampo Pyysalo, Samson Tan, Sebastian Nagel, Shamik Bose, Shamsud-
deen Hassan Muhammad, Shanya Sharma, Shayne Longpre, Somaieh Nikpoor, Stanislav Silberberg,
StellaBiderman, SuhasPai, SuzanaIli´ c, SydneyZink, TevenLeScao, ThomasWang, TiagoTimponi
Torrent, Timo Schick, Tristan Thrush, Valentin Danchev, Vassilina Nikoulina, Veronika Laippala,
Violette Lepercq, Vrinda Prabhu, Yacine Jernite, Zaid Alyafeai, Zeerak Talat
Tokenization
Arun Raja, Benjamin Heinzerling, Benoˆ ıt Sagot, Chenglei Si, Colin Raffel, Davut Emre Ta¸ sar, Eliz-
abeth Salesky, Lucile Saulnier, Manan Dey, Matthias Gallé, Pedro Ortiz Suarez, Roman Castagné,
Sabrina J. Mielke, Samson Tan, Teven Le Scao, Thomas Wang, Wilson Y. Lee, Zaid Alyafeai
Prompt Engineering
Abheesht Sharma, Albert Webson, Alexander M. Rush, Alham Fikri Aji, Andrea Santilli, Antoine
Chaffin, Arnaud Stiegler, Arun Raja, Canwen Xu, Colin Raffel, Debajyoti Datta, Dragomir Radev,
Eliza Szczechla, Gunjan Chhablani, Han Wang, Harshit Pandey, Hendrik Strobelt, Jason Alan
Fries, Jonathan Chang, Jos Rozen, Khalid Almubarak, Leo Gao, Lintang Sutawika, M Saiful Bari,
Maged S. Al-shaibani, Manan Dey, Matteo Manica, Mike Tian-Jian Jiang, Nihal Nayak, Niklas
Muennighoff, Rachel Bawden, Ryan Teehan, Samuel Albanie, Shanya Sharma, Sheng Shen, Srulik
Ben-David, Stella Biderman, Stephen H. Bach, Taewoon Kim, Tali Bers, Teven Le Scao, Thibault
Fevry, Thomas Wang, Thomas Wolf, Trishala Neeraj, Urmish Thakker, Victor Sanh, Vikas Raunak,
∗. Please direct correspondence to bigscience-contact@googlegroups.com . A list of contributions is
available in Section 6.arXiv:2211.05100v4  [cs.CL]  27 Jun 2023BigScience Workshop
Xiangru Tang, Zaid Alyafeai, Zheng-Xin Yong, Zhiqing Sun, Shaked Brody, Yallow Uri, Hadar
Tojarieh
Architecture and Objective
Adam Roberts, Colin Raffel, Daniel Hesslow, Hady Elsahar, Hyung Won Chung, Iz Beltagy, Jaesung
Tae, Jason Phang, Julien Launay, Lintang Sutawika, Lucile Saulnier, M Saiful Bari, Niklas Muen-
nighoff, Ofir Press, Sheng Shen, Stas Bekman, Stella Biderman, Teven Le Scao, Thomas Wang,
Vassilina Nikoulina, Victor Sanh, Zheng-Xin Yong
Engineering
Conglong Li, Deepak Narayanan, Hatim Bourfoune, Jared Casper, Jeff Rasley, Max Ryabinin,
Mayank Mishra, Minjia Zhang, Mohammad Shoeybi, Myriam Peyrounette, Nicolas Patry, Niklas
Muennighoff, Nouamane Tazi, Olatunji Ruwase, Omar Sanseviero, Patrick von Platen, Pierre Cor-
nette, PierreFran¸ coisLavallée, RémiLacroix, SamyamRajbhandari, SanchitGandhi, ShadenSmith,
Stas Bekman, Stéphane Requena, Suraj Patil, Teven Le Scao, Thomas Wang, Tim Dettmers
Evaluation and Interpretability
Ahmed Baruwa, Albert Webson, Alexandra Sasha Luccioni, Alham Fikri Aji, Amanpreet Singh,
Anastasia Cheveleva, Anne-Laure Ligozat, Arjun Subramonian, Aurélie Névéol, Charles Lovering,
Dan Garrette, Deepak Tunuguntla, Dragomir Radev, Ehud Reiter, Ekaterina Taktasheva, Ekaterina
Voloshina, Eli Bogdanov, Ellie Pavlick, Fran¸ cois Yvon, Genta Indra Winata, Hailey Schoelkopf,
Jaesung Tae, Jan-Christoph Kalo, Jekaterina Novikova, Jessica Zosa Forde, Jordan Clive, Jungo
Kasai, Ken Kawamura, Khalid Almubarak, Liam Hazan, Lintang Sutawika, Manan Dey, Maraim
Masoud, Margaret Mitchell, Marine Carpuat, Miruna Clinciu, Najoung Kim, Newton Cheng, Niklas
Muennighoff, Oleg Serikov, Omer Antverg, Oskar van der Wal, Pawan Sasanka Ammanamanchi,
Pierre Colombo, Rachel Bawden, Rui Zhang, Ruochen Zhang, Samson Tan, Sebastian Gehrmann,
Shachar Mirkin, Shani Pais, Shanya Sharma, Shayne Longpre, Stella Biderman, Tatiana Shavrina,
Thomas Scialom, Tian Yun, Tomasz Limisiewicz, Urmish Thakker, Vassilina Nikoulina, Verena
Rieser, Vikas Raunak, Vitaly Protasov, Vladislav Mikhailov, Wilson Y. Lee, Yada Pruksachatkun,
Yonatan Belinkov, Zachary Bamberger, Zdenˇ ek Kasner, Zeerak Talat, Zheng-Xin Yong
Broader Impacts
Aaron Gokaslan, Alexandra Sasha Luccioni, Alham Fikri Aji, Alice Rueda, Amanda Pestana, Amir
Feizpour, Ammar Khan, Amy Faranak, Ana Santos, Angelina McMillan-Major, Anthony Hevia,
Antigona Unldreaj, Arash Aghagol, Arezoo Abdollahi, Aycha Tammour, Azadeh HajiHosseini, Ba-
hareh Behroozi, Benjamin Ajibade, Bharat Saxena, Carlos Mu˜ noz Ferrandis, Chenghao Mou, Minh
Chien Vu, Christopher Akiki, Daniel McDuff, Danish Contractor, David Ifeoluwa Adelani, David
Lansky, Davis David, Douwe Kiela, Duong A. Nguyen, Edward Tan, Emi Baylor, Ezinwanne Ozoani,
Fatima Mirza, Frankline Ononiwu, Gérard Dupont, Giada Pistilli, Habib Rezanejad, Hessie Jones,
Huu Nguyen, Ian Yu, Indrani Bhattacharya, Irene Solaiman, Irina Sedenko, Isar Nejadgholi, Jae-
sung Tae, Jenny Chim, Jesse Dodge, Jesse Passmore, Josh Seltzer, Julien Launay, Julio Bonis Sanz,
Khalid Almubarak, Livia Dutra, Long Phan, Mairon Samagaio, Manan Dey, Maraim Masoud, Mar-
garet Mitchell, Margot Mieskes, Marissa Gerchick, Martha Akinlolu, Michael McKenna, Mike Qiu,
Muhammed Ghauri, Mykola Burynok, Nafis Abrar, Nazneen Rajani, Niklas Muennighoff, Nishant
Subramani, Nour Elkott, Nour Fahmy, Olanrewaju Samuel, Olivier Nguyen, Paulo Villegas, Pawan
Sasanka Ammanamanchi, Priscilla Amuok, Ran An, Rasmus Kromann, Ryan Hao, Samira Alizadeh,
Sarmad Shubber, Shanya Sharma, Shayne Longpre, Silas Wang, Somaieh Nikpoor, Sourav Roy, Stas
Bekman, Stella Biderman, Suhas Pai, Suzana Ili´ c, Sylvain Viguier, Teven Le Scao, Thanh Le, Tobi
Oyebade, Trieu Le, Tristan Thrush, Yacine Jernite, Yoyo Yang, Zach Nguyen, Zeerak Talat, Zheng-
Xin Yong
Applications
Abhinav Ramesh Kashyap, Albert Villanova del Moral, Alfredo Palasciano, Alison Callahan, Anima
Shukla, Antonio Miranda-Escalada, Ayush Singh, Benjamin Beilharz, Bo Wang, Caio Brito, Carlos
2BLOOM
Mu˜ noz Ferrandis, Chenxi Zhou, Chirag Jain, Christopher Akiki, Chuxin Xu, Clémentine Fourrier,
DanielLeónPeri˜ nán, DanielMolano, DanielvanStrien, DanishContractor, DavidLansky, Debajyoti
Datta, Dian Yu, Enrique Manjavacas, Fabio Barth, Florian Fuhrimann, Francesco De Toni, Gabriel
Altay, Giyaseddin Bayrak, Gully Burns, Helena U. Vrabec, Imane Bello, Ishani Dash, Jason Alan
Fries, Javier de la Rosa, Jenny Chim, Jihyun Kang, John Giorgi, Jonas Golde, Jose David Posada,
Karthik Rangasai Sivaraman, Leon Weber, Lokesh Bulchandani, Lu Liu, Luisa Shinzato, Madeleine
Hahn de Bykhovetz, Maiko Takeuchi, Marc Pàmies, Maria A Castillo, Marianna Nezhurina, Mario
S¨ anger, Matthias Samwald, Michael Cullan, Michael Weinberg, Michiel De Wolf, Mina Mihaljcic,
Minh Chien Vu, Minna Liu, Moritz Freidank, Myungsun Kang, Natasha Seelam, Nathan Dahlberg,
Nicholas Michio Broad, Nikolaus Muellner, Pascale Fung, Patrick Haller, Ramya Chandrasekhar,
Renata Eisenberg, Robert Martin, Rodrigo Canalli, Rosaline Su, Ruisi Su, Samuel Cahyawijaya,
Samuele Garda, Shamik Bose, Shlok S Deshmukh, Shubhanshu Mishra, Sid Kiblawi, Simon Ott,
Sinee Sang-aroonsiri, Srishti Kumar, Stefan Schweter, Stella Biderman, Stephen H. Bach, Sushil
Bharati, Tanmay Laud, Théo Gigant, Tomoya Kainuma, Trishala Neeraj, Wojciech Kusa, Yanis
Labrak, Yash Shailesh Bajaj, Yash Venkatraman, Yifan Xu, Yingxin Xu, Yu Xu, Zhe Tan, Zhongli
Xie, Zifan Ye
Organization
AngelaFan,ChristopherAkiki,DouweKiela,GiadaPistilli,MargotMieskes,MathildeBras,Matthias
Gallé, Suzana Ili´ c, Yacine Jernite, Younes Belkada, Thomas Wolf
Abstract
Large language models (LLMs) have been shown to be able to perform new tasks based on
a few demonstrations or natural language instructions. While these capabilities have led to
widespread adoption, most LLMs are developed by resource-rich organizations and are fre-
quently kept from the public. As a step towards democratizing this powerful technology, we
present BLOOM, a 176B-parameter open-access language model designed and built thanks
to a collaboration of hundreds of researchers. BLOOM is a decoder-only Transformer lan-
guage model that was trained on the ROOTS corpus, a dataset comprising hundreds of
sources in 46 natural and 13 programming languages (59 in total). We find that BLOOM
achieves competitive performance on a wide variety of benchmarks, with stronger results
after undergoing multitask prompted finetuning. To facilitate future research and appli-
cations using LLMs, we publicly release our models and code under the Responsible AI
License.1
Keywords: Language models, collaborative research
1. Introduction
Pretrained language models have become a cornerstone of modern natural language pro-
cessing (NLP) pipelines because they often produce better performance from smaller quan-
tities of labeled data. The development of ELMo (Peters et al., 2018), ULMFiT (Howard
and Ruder, 2018), GPT (Radford et al., 2018), and BERT (Devlin et al., 2019) led to the
widespread use of pretrained models as an initialization for finetuning on downstream tasks.
The subsequent finding that pretrained language models can perform useful tasks without
any additional training (Radford et al., 2019; Brown et al., 2020) further demonstrated their
utility. In addition, the empirical observation that a language model’s performance tends to
increase as the model is made larger—sometimes predictably (Hestness et al., 2017; Kaplan
1.hf.co/bigscience/bloom
3BigScience Workshop
et al., 2020; Hoffmann et al., 2022) and sometimes suddenly (Wei et al., 2022)—has led to a
trend of increasing scale (Zeng et al., 2021; Rae et al., 2021; Smith et al., 2022; Chowdhery
et al., 2022). Apart from environmental concerns (Strubell et al., 2019; Lacoste et al., 2019;
Schwartz et al., 2020), the costs of training large language models (LLMs) are only afford-
able for well-resourced organizations. Furthermore, until recently, most LLMs were not
publicly released. As a result, the majority of the research community has been excluded
from the development of LLMs. This exclusion has had concrete consequences; for exam-
ple, most LLMs are primarily trained on English-language text (with notable exceptions in
Chinese and Korean, e.g. Wang et al., 2021; Zeng et al., 2021; Kim et al., 2021).
To address these issues, we present the BigScience Large Open-science Open-access Mul-
tilingual Language Model (BLOOM, BigScience Workshop, 2022). BLOOM is a 176 billion
parameter language model trained on 46 natural languages and 13 programming languages
that was developed and released by a collaboration of hundreds of researchers. The com-
pute for training BLOOM was provided through a French public grant from GENCI and
IDRIS, leveraging IDRIS’ Jean Zay supercomputer. To build BLOOM, we undertook a
thorough design process for each of its components, including the training dataset (Sec-
tion 3.1), model architecture and training objective (Section 3.2), and engineering strategy
for distributed learning (Section 3.4). We also performed an analysis of the model’s capa-
bilities (Section 4). Our overall aim is not only to publicly release a large-scale multilingual
language model with performance comparable to recently developed systems, but also to
document the coordinated process that went into its development (Section 2.2). The pur-
pose of this paper is to provide a high-level overview of these design steps while referencing
the individual reports we produced over the course of developing BLOOM.
2. Background
Before describing the BLOOM model itself, in this section we provide necessary background
on LLMs as well as an organizational overview of the BigScience effort.
2.1 Language Modeling
Language modeling refers to the task of modeling the probability of a sequence of tokens in a
text (Shannon, 1948), where a token is a unit of text (e.g. word, subword, character or byte,
etc., as discussed by Mielke et al., 2021). In this work (and in most current applications of
language modeling) we model the joint probability of tokens in a text as:
p(x) =p(x1, . . . , x T) =TY
t=1p(xt|x<t) (1)
where xis a sequence of tokens, xtis the tthtoken, and x<tis the sequence of tokens
preceding xt. This approach is referred to as autoregressive language modeling and can be
seen as iteratively predicting the probability of the next token.
Early Language Models Language models have a long history of application in NLP.
Early language models (such as those developed by Shannon, 1948) were primarily n-gram
models that estimate the probability of a length- nsequence of tokens in accordance with
4BLOOM
the number of times it appears in a training corpus. In practice, n-gram models face two
major issues: first, they grow exponentially in size as nis increased; and second, they have
no direct way of producing a probability for a sequence of tokens that does not appear in
their training data. Advances on these problems enabled n-gram models to see widespread
use across most areas of NLP (Goodman, 2001).
Neural Language Models An alternative to n-gram models, first proposed by Miikku-
lainen and Dyer (1991) and Schmidhuber and Heil (1996) and later popularized by Bengio
et al. (2000), is to use a neural network to estimate the probability of the next token given
prior tokens. While early work used feed-forward networks with a fixed-length history win-
dow, Mikolov et al. (2010); Sutskever et al. (2011); Graves (2013) proposed to use recurrent
neural networks instead and found that this significantly improved performance. More re-
cently, language models based on the Transformer architecture (Vaswani et al., 2017) were
shown to be more effective than recurrent neural networks (Radford et al., 2018; Al-Rfou
et al., 2019; Kaplan et al., 2020). Consequently, the Transformer has become the de facto
choice for language models.
Transfer Learning In tandem with advances in language modeling using neural net-
works, NLP pipelines have increasingly adopted the framework of transfer learning. In
transfer learning, the parameters of a model are first pretrained on a data-rich task be-
fore being finetuned on a downstream task. A historically common approach to obtaining
pretrained parameters were word vectors (Mikolov et al., 2013) trained so that the dot
product of co-occurring word vectors is large. However, subsequent work by Peters et al.
(2018); Howard and Ruder (2018); Radford et al. (2018); Devlin et al. (2019) showed that
the framework of Collobert et al. (2011), where the entire model is pretrained before being
finetuned, can attain stronger performance. In particular, Radford et al. (2018); Devlin
et al. (2019) demonstrated strong results using pretrained Transformer language models,
prompting work on progressively better models (Liu et al., 2019; Yang et al., 2019; Lewis
et al., 2020; Raffel et al., 2020; Zhang et al., 2019, etc.).
Few-andZero-ShotLearning Whilefinetuningapretrainedmodelremainsaneffective
way of attaining high performance with limited labeled data, a parallel line of work has
demonstrated that pretrained language models can be induced to perform tasks without any
subsequenttraining. AfterVinyalsandLe(2015)observedlimitedtask-performingbehavior
in a neural dialog model, Radford et al. (2019) later demonstrated that Transformer-based
language models trained on text scraped from the web could perform various tasks to
varying degrees. Notably, Radford et al. (2019) found that performance improved with
model scale, inspiring work to characterize (Kaplan et al., 2020; Hoffmann et al., 2022) and
exploit (Shoeybi et al., 2019; Brown et al., 2020; Smith et al., 2022; Chowdhery et al., 2022;
Rae et al., 2021; Wang et al., 2021; Zeng et al., 2021; Zhang et al., 2022) the benefits of scale.
A major factor in the success of this approach is the way that task-specific examples are
formatted when fed into the model. Brown et al. (2020) popularized the idea of designing
“prompts” that provide natural-language descriptions of the task and also allow inputting
a few demonstrations of input-output behavior.
Social Limitations of LLM Development While the continued increase in the size of
large language models has resulted in improvements across a wide range of tasks, it has also
5BigScience Workshop
exacerbatedissueswiththeirdevelopmentanduse(Benderetal.,2021). Thecomputational
expense of large models also prohibits the majority of the research community from partici-
pating in their development, evaluation and routine use. Moreover, the computational costs
have also lead to concerns about the carbon footprint stemming from the training and use
of large language models (Strubell et al., 2019; Lacoste et al., 2019; Schwartz et al., 2020;
Bannour et al., 2021), and existing carbon footprint studies have likely under-estimated
emissions (Bannour et al., 2021). Contributing to an increase in the global carbon footprint
exacerbates climate change which most severely affects already-marginalized communities
(Westra and Lawson, 2001). Furthermore, the concentration of resources within a handful
of (typically industrial) institutions with primarily technical expertise hinders prospects
for an inclusive, collaborative, and reliable governance of the technology. First, public
narratives about the technology that are driven by industry actors can lead to inflated
expectations about its suitability for use (Brennen, 2018; Brennen et al., 2022), leading
to misaligned research and policy priorities (Raji et al., 2022) and potentially dire conse-
quences in e.g. medical applications (Wong et al., 2021). Second, in a world mediated by
technology, choices at all stages of its development end up shaping people’s lives in a way
that can be most closely compared to regulations (Winner, 1977, 2017), albeit without the
same explicit consultation of stakeholders in the process. When the development efforts are
guided by prioritizing internal definitions of performance over their impact on society, the
values of the developers come to be emphasized over those of the direct and indirect users
(Birhane et al., 2022). Despite the substantial social dangers in allowing this technology
to be developed unilaterally by corporations, EleutherAI (Phang et al., 2022) was the only
non-corporate entity outside of China that was developing large language models before the
BigScience Workshop was convened.
2.2 BigScience
Participants BLOOM’s development was coordinated by BigScience, an open research
collaboration whose goal was the public release of an LLM. The project started after being
awardedbyGENCIacomputegrantonitsJeanZaysupercomputeratIDRIS/CNRS.Itwas
initially built around a concerted effort from Hugging Face and the French NLP community
(the “founding members”), and quickly opened up to grow into a broader international
collaboration to support its aims of linguistic, geographical, and scientific diversity. In
the end, over 1200 people registered as participants in BigScience and were given access
to its communication channels. They had background not only in machine learning and
computer science, but also linguistics, statistics, socio-cultural anthropology, philosophy,
law, and other fields. Of those, hundreds of individuals have directly contributed to one
of the project’s released artifacts. While the largest number of participants ultimately
originated from the US, 38 countries were represented.
Organization The set of related research questions tackled by the BigScience effort was
reflected in the project’s organization into working groups. Each working group comprised
several participants with various levels of involvement, including chairs whose role was
to self-organize around a specific aspect of the overall project. Importantly, participants
were encouraged to join more than one working group in order to share experiences and
information, which resulted in the set of 30 working groups presented in Figure 1. Most
6BLOOM
of the working groups focused on tasks directly linked to the development of BLOOM.
In addition, a few groups focused on the evaluation of LLMs and dataset development in
specific domains, such as biomedical texts (Fries et al., 2022b) and historical texts (De Toni
et al., 2022). A larger overview of the motivations behind this initiative, its history and
some of the lessons learned can be found in Akiki et al. (2022).
Sourcing
Governance
Tooling
Analysis
Data 
Biomedical
Historical 
Texts
Domains
Extrinsic
Intrinsic
Few-shot
Interpretability
Evaluation
Meta-WG 
Social
Enviromental
Media
Bloom 
Book
External 
impact
Bias-Fairness
Multilinguality
Organization
Collaborations
Engineering
Model 
Sharing
Cross 
areas
Tokenization
Metadata
Multilinguality
Architecture
Modeling
Retrieval
Prompting
Model 
Card
Ethical 
and 
Legal
Hackathon
Data 
preparation
Figure 1: Organization of BigScience working groups.
Ethical Considerations within BigScience In order to acknowledge and start ad-
dressing social limitations of LLM development within BigScience, the workshop relied on a
collaboratively designed Ethical Charter2and original research on applicable regulations in
jurisdictionsoutsideoftheUS3toguideitschoicesthroughouttheproject. Inparticular, the
charter emphasizes values of inclusivity and diversity ,openness and reproducibil-
ity, andresponsibility in various aspects of the organization (Akiki et al., 2022). Each of
these values are showcased in different ways in the dataset curation (Section 3.1), model-
ing (Section 3.2), engineering (Section 3.4), evaluation (Section 4), and other social impact
(throughout) aspects of the project.
3. BLOOM
In this section, we document the design of BLOOM, including its training dataset (Sec-
tion 3.1), architecture (Section 3.2), tokenizer (Section 3.3), computing infrastructure (Sec-
tion 3.4), and training hyperparameters (Section 3.5).
3.1 Training Dataset
BLOOM was trained on the ROOTS corpus (Lauren¸ con et al., 2022), a composite collection
of 498 Hugging Face datasets (Lhoest et al., 2021) amounting to 1.61 terabytes of text that
span 46 natural languages and 13 programming languages. A high-level overview of this
dataset can be seen in Figure 3, while a detailed itemized list of every language along with
its linguistic genus, family and macroarea is presented in Table 1. Beyond the corpus
itself, the process resulted in the development and release of a number of organizational
and technical tools, including those illustrated in Figure 2. The rest of this section will
2.bigscience.huggingface.co/blog/bigscience-ethical-charter
3.bigscience.huggingface.co/blog/legal-playbook-for-natural-language-processing-researchers
7BigScience Workshop
Language ISO-639-3 catalog-ref Genus Family Macroarea Size in Bytes
Akan aka ak Kwa Niger-Congo Africa 70,1554
Arabic arb ar Semitic Afro-Asiatic Eurasia 74,854,900,600
Assamese asm as Indic Indo-European Eurasia 291,522,098
Bambara bam bm Western Mande Mande Africa 391,747
Basque eus eu Basque Basque Eurasia 2,360,470,848
Bengali ben bn Indic Indo-European Eurasia 18,606,823,104
Catalan cat ca Romance Indo-European Eurasia 17,792,493,289
Chichewa nya ny Bantoid Niger-Congo Africa 1,187,405
chiShona sna sn Bantoid Niger-Congo Africa 6,638,639
Chitumbuka tum tum Bantoid Niger-Congo Africa 170,360
English eng en Germanic Indo-European Eurasia 484,953,009,124
Fon fon fon Kwa Niger-Congo Africa 2,478,546
French fra fr Romance Indo-European Eurasia 208,242,620,434
Gujarati guj gu Indic Indo-European Eurasia 1,199,986,460
Hindi hin hi Indic Indo-European Eurasia 24,622,119,985
Igbo ibo ig Igboid Niger-Congo Africa 14078,521
Indonesian ind id Malayo-Sumbawan Austronesian Papunesia 19,972,325,222
isiXhosa xho xh Bantoid Niger-Congo Africa 14,304,074
isiZulu zul zu Bantoid Niger-Congo Africa 8,511,561
Kannada kan kn Southern Dravidian Dravidian Eurasia 2,098,453,560
Kikuyu kik ki Bantoid Niger-Congo Africa 359,615
Kinyarwanda kin rw Bantoid Niger-Congo Africa 40,428,299
Kirundi run rn Bantoid Niger-Congo Africa 3,272,550
Lingala lin ln Bantoid Niger-Congo Africa 1,650,804
Luganda lug lg Bantoid Niger-Congo Africa 4,568,367
Malayalam mal ml Southern Dravidian Dravidian Eurasia 3,662,571,498
Marathi mar mr Indic Indo-European Eurasia 1,775,483,122
Nepali nep ne Indic Indo-European Eurasia 2,551,307,393
Northern Sotho nso nso Bantoid Niger-Congo Africa 1,764,506
Odia ori or Indic Indo-European Eurasia 1,157,100,133
Portuguese por pt Romance Indo-European Eurasia 79,277,543,375
Punjabi pan pa Indic Indo-European Eurasia 1,572,109,752
Sesotho sot st Bantoid Niger-Congo Africa 751,034
Setswana tsn tn Bantoid Niger-Congo Africa 1,502,200
Simplified Chinese — zhs Chinese Sino-Tibetan Eurasia 261,019,433,892
Spanish spa es Romance Indo-European Eurasia 175,098,365,045
Swahili swh sw Bantoid Niger-Congo Africa 236,482,543
Tamil tam ta Southern Dravidian Dravidian Eurasia 7,989,206,220
Telugu tel te South-Central Dravidian Dravidian Eurasia 2993407,159
Traditional Chinese — zht Chinese Sino-Tibetan Eurasia 762,489,150
Twi twi tw Kwa Niger-Congo Africa 1,265,041
Urdu urd ur Indic Indo-European Eurasia 2,781,329,959
Vietnamese vie vi Viet-Muong Austro-Asiatic Eurasia 43,709,279,959
Wolof wol wo Wolof Niger-Congo Africa 3,606,973
Xitsonga tso ts Bantoid Niger-Congo Africa 707,634
Yoruba yor yo Defoid Niger-Congo Africa 89,695,835
Programming Languages — — — — 174,700,245,772
Table 1: Linguistic makeup of the ROOTS corpus.
8BLOOM
contextualize these efforts by providing a brief summary of the steps taken to compile the
corpus. For more detailed documentation of the overall dataset curation process and its
outcomes, we refer the reader to Lauren¸ con et al. (2022).
Motivation The disconnect between developers and (in)voluntary users of the technology
mentioned in Section 2 is particularly apparent in the curation of the datasets that have
supported recent large-scale machine learning projects, where intentional “Data work” is
generally under-valued (Sambasivan et al., 2021). In the context of LLMs, this tendency
is exemplified by a range of heuristics-based filtering approaches that prioritize getting as
much “high-quality” data for as little cost as possible over engaging with the needs—and
rights—of data subjects, where quality is commonly defined as maximizing performance on
downstream tasks while occasionally removing content deemed offensive by the developers.
Whiletheseapproachesdoyieldterabytesofdatawithcomparativelylittlehumaneffort,
compounding biases of the source material (such as CommonCrawl dumps) with those of
the filtering method often leads to negative outcomes for marginalized populations. In
one case, the use of a block list to remove “pornographic” text was shown to also suppress
LGBTQ+ and African American English (AAE) text from a corpus (Dodge et al., 2021). In
another, using Reddit outgoing links as an indicator of quality for a seed corpus (Radford
et al., 2019) leads to trained models that implicitly prioritize US-centric views in their
outputs (Johnson et al., 2022). In yet another project, a filtering approach that relied on
a machine learning image-text alignment model was shown to exacerbate its biases in the
created multimodal dataset (Birhane et al., 2021). In addition, this abstractive approach
to data curation leads to corpora that are difficult to meaningfully document and govern
after the fact, as the provenance and authorship of individual items is usually lost in the
process (although works such as Gao et al. (2020) that prioritize compilations of previously
documented individual sources over crawled data provide a step towards addressing these
issues (Biderman et al., 2022)).
In the context of the BigScience workshop, and in accordance with its Ethical Charter,4
we aimed to prioritize human involvement, local expertise, and language expertise in our
data curation and documentation process, as outlined in the following sections.
3.1.1 Data Governance
Large text corpora comprise text about and created by people: the data subjects. Different
people and institutions might legally “own” that data, making them data rights-holders. As
machinelearningdevelopersgatherandcollatethatdataintoever-largerdatasetstosupport
training larger models, it becomes increasingly important to develop new ways of accounting
for the interests of all parties involved – developers, data subjects, and rights-holders alike.
The BigScience effort aimed to address these needs through a multidisciplinary lens
combining technical, legal, and sociological expertise. The group focused on two main
interrelated goals at two different time scales: the design of a structure for long-term inter-
national data governance that prioritizes the agency of the data rights-holders, and concrete
recommendations for handling the data used directly in the BigScience project. Progress on
the first goal is presented in the work of Jernite et al. (2022), which further motivates the
needs and requirements of data governance, and outlines the structure needed for a network
4.bigscience.huggingface.co/blog/bigscience-ethical-charter
9BigScience Workshop
of data custodians, rights-holders, and other parties to appropriately govern shared data.
The interactions between these actors are designed to account for the privacy, intellectual
property, and user rights of the data and algorithm subjects in a way that aims to prioritize
local knowledge and expression of guiding values. In particular, this approach relies on
structured agreements between data providers and data hosts5that specify what the data
may be used for.
While we were not able to fully establish an international organization in the compar-
atively short time between the project start and model training, we worked on integrating
lessons from this effort (and conversely adapting it to the practical concerns we were ex-
periencing) in the following main ways: (i) we sought explicit permission to use the data
from specific providers within the context of BigScience whenever possible (such as for
the AI26-managed S2ORC corpus of Lo et al. (2020) or articles from the French newspaper
Le Monde7); (ii) we kept individual sources separate until the final stages of preprocessing
to maintain traceability and handle each according to the needs of its specific context; and
(iii) we adopted a composite release approach for the various data sources that make up the
overall corpus to foster reproducibility and follow-up research while respecting these source-
dependent needs. Resources to visualize and access the ROOTS corpus can be found on the
Hugging Face Hub organization “BigScience Data”.8The organization hosts several demos
(or “Spaces”) that can be used to gain insights into the full corpus, as well as direct access
to the 223 (out of 498) components that we are able to distribute taking into account their
licensing status, privacy risks, and agreements with their original custodians. Finally, since
we understand that future investigation into the BLOOM models may require full access to
the entire corpus, we are also inviting researchers with a relevant research project in mind
to join ongoing efforts to analyze the data through a sign-up form.9
3.1.2 Data Sources
Given a strategy for data governance, the next step was to determine the composition of
the training corpus. This stage was driven by several goals, which sometimes had inherent
tensions. Some of those tensions included building a language model that was accessible to
asmanypeopleaspossiblearoundtheworldwhileonlyincludinglanguagesforwhichwehad
enoughexpertisetocurateadatasetofcomparablescale(andtoalesserextentcomposition)
to previous efforts while improving the standards of documentation and respect for data
and algorithm subject rights.
Language Choices These considerations led us to an incremental process for choosing
which languages were to be included in the corpus. We started with a list of eight of the
world’s largest languages by number of speakers for which we did active outreach in the
early stages of the project to invite fluent speakers to join the data efforts. Then, on the
recommendation of language communities (Nekoto et al., 2020) we expanded Swahili in
the original selection to the category of Niger-Congo languages, and Hindi and Urdu to
5.hf.co/spaces/bigscience/data_host_provider_agreement
6.allenai.org
7.lemonde.fr
8.hf.co/bigscience-data
9.forms.gle/qyYswbEL5kA23Wu99
10BLOOM
Indic languages (Kunchukuttan et al., 2020). Finally, we proposed that any group of 3 or
more participants fluent in an additional language could add it to the supported list if they
would commit to selecting sources and guiding processing choices in the language in order
to avoid common issues with corpora selected through automatic language identification
without specific language expertise (Caswell et al., 2022).
Source Selection The biggest part of the corpus was curated by workshop participants
and research collectives who collectively compiled the “BigScience Catalogue”: a large list
of processed and non-processed sources covering a wide range of languages. This took
the form of hackathons that were co-organized by communities such as Machine Learning
Tokyo, Masakhane, and LatinX in AI (McMillan-Major et al., 2022). Complementary to
those efforts, other working group participants compiled language-specific resources such as
the Arabic-focused Masader repository (Alyafeai et al., 2021; Altaher et al., 2022). A total
of 252 sources were identified through this bottom-up approach, with at least 21 sources
per language category. Additionally, in order to increase the geographic coverage of some of
our Spanish, Chinese, French, and English sources, participants identified locally relevant
websites in their language to be added to the corpus via pseudocrawl, a method to obtain
those websites from a Common Crawl snapshot.
GitHub Code The catalogue was further complemented with a dataset of programming
languages collected from the GitHub data collection on Google’s BigQuery,10which was
then deduplicated of exact matches. The choice of languages to include mirrored the design
choices introduced by Li et al. (2022) to train the AlphaCode model.
OSCAR Both in an effort not to diverge from the standard research practice of using
the Web as a source of pretraining data (Radford et al., 2018; Raffel et al., 2020), and
also to satisfy the data volume needs of our compute budget given the size of BLOOM,
we further sourced data from OSCAR version 21.09, corresponding to the February 2021
snapshot of the Common Crawl (Ortiz Suárez et al., 2019; Abadji et al., 2021), which ended
up constituting 38% of the corpus.
3.1.3 Data Preprocessing
After the sources had been identified, data processing involved several steps to handle mul-
tiple aspects of data curation. An overarching view of and processing pipeline to build
ROOTS can be seen in Figure 2. All tools developed in the process are available on
GitHub.11
Obtaining the Source Data The first step involved obtaining the data for all of the text
data sources identified in Section 3.1.2, which consisted of a combination of downloading
and extracting the text field from a variety of NLP datasets in various formats (including
e.g. question answering, summarization, or dialogue datasets), scraping and processing large
amounts of PDF files from archives (e.g. the French repository of scientific articles12), and
extracting and preprocessing text from 192 website entries from the catalogue and another
10.cloud.google.com/blog/topics/public-datasets/github-on-bigquery-analyze-all-the-open-
source-code
11.github.com/bigscience-workshop/data-preparation
12.hal.archives-ouvertes.fr
11BigScience Workshop
Sourcing
Pre-processingCrowdsourced Datasets Common Crawl-based Dataset
OSCAR
manual merging & source-level
deduplication
StoreIdentified Datasets
and CollectionsPseudo-Crawled
DataGitHub Code
semi-automatic  
cleaning & filtering & deduplication
personal identifiable information
removalsemi-automatic  
cleaning & filtering & deduplication
Figure2: CreationPipelineof theROOTS Corpus. The purple-coloredsourcingstage ofthe
pipeline and the yellow-colored processing stage are described respectively in Section 3.1.2
and Section 3.1.3.
geographically diverse set of 456 websites selected by data working group members. The
latter required the development of new tools to extract text from the HTML in the Common
Crawl WARC files, which we made available on the main data preparation repository.13We
were able to find and extract usable text data from all URLs present in 539 of the websites.
“Quality” filtering: Text Produced by Humans for Humans After obtaining the
text, we found that most of the sources contained some amount of text that was not natural
language, for example preprocessing errors, SEO pages, or spam (including pornographic
spam). In order to filter non-natural language, we defined a set of quality indicators,
where high-quality text is defined as “written by humans for humans”, without distinction of
content(aswewantedcontentselectiontoexclusivelybethedomainofthemoreaccountable
human source selection) or a priorijudgments of grammaticality. The full list of indicators
are described in (Lauren¸ con et al., 2022). Importantly, the indicators were adapted to the
needs of each of the sources in two main ways. First, their parameters such as the thresholds
and supporting term lists were selected individually for each language by fluent speakers.
Second, we manually went through each individual source to identify which indicators were
most likely to identify non-natural language. Both processes were supported by tools to
visualize their impact.14,15
13.github.com/bigscience-workshop/data-preparation/tree/main/sourcing/cc_pseudo_crawl
14.hf.co/spaces/huggingface/text-data-filtering
15.hf.co/spaces/bigscience-data/process-pipeline-visualizer
12BLOOM
 
Eurasia
AfricaIndo-European Sino-Tibetan
Afro-Asiatic Austro- Asiatic
DravidianRomance Germanic
IndicChinese
Semitic Viet-MuongFrench Spanish
Portuguese CatalanEnglish Simplified Chinese
Arabic Vietnamese
Figure 3: Graphical overview of the ROOTS corpus. Left:A treemap plot of the language
families of all 46 natural languages where surface is proportional to the number of bytes.
Indo-European and Sino-Tibetan families overwhelm the plot with a combined total of
1321.89 GB. The thin orange surface represents 18GB of Indonesian data and the green
rectangle 0.4GB constituting the Niger-Congo language family subset. Right:A waffle plot
of the distribution of the 13 programming languages by size, where one square represents
approximately 200MB.
Deduplication and Privacy Redaction Finally, we removed near-duplicate documents
with two deduplication steps and redacted Personal Identifiable Information (such as social
security numbers) that we could identify from the OSCAR version of the corpus—as it was
deemed to be the source that presented the highest privacy risks, prompting us to apply
regex-based redaction even in cases where the expressions had some false positives.
3.1.4 Prompted Datasets
enesptfraridzhhicode viurtetabnmrswgupaneyoignyzuxhsntsrwlgtnnsornmlknoraslnwotum kistfoncaeuakbmtw25
5
1
0.1
0.01
0.001
0.0001% of corpusxP3
ROOTS
Figure 4: Language distribution of the prompted dataset xP3 closely follows ROOTS.
.
Multitask prompted finetuning (also referred to as instruction tuning) involves finetun-
ing a pretrained language model on a training mixture composed of a large set of different
tasks specified through natural language prompts. T0 (Sanh et al., 2022) (developed as
part of BigScience) demonstrated that language models finetuned on a multitask mixture
of prompted datasets have strong zero-shot task generalization abilities. Moreover, T0 was
shown to outperform language models that are an order of magnitude larger but did not
undergo such finetuning. Motivated by these results, we explored using existing natural
language datasets to carry out multitask prompted finetuning.
13BigScience Workshop
T0 was trained on a subset of the Public Pool of Prompts (P3), a collection of prompts
for various existing and open-source English natural language datasets. This collection
of prompts was created through a series of hackathons involving BigScience collaborators
and where hackathon participants wrote a total of of 2000+ prompts for 170+ datasets.
Datasets in P3 cover a variety of natural language task including sentiment analysis, ques-
tion answering, and natural language inference and exclude harmful content or non-natural
language such as programming languages. PromptSource (Bach et al., 2022),16an open-
source toolkit (also developed as part of BigScience) facilitated creating, sharing and using
natural language prompts. Full details of the collection process are given in (Sanh et al.,
2022; Bach et al., 2022).
After pretraining BLOOM, we applied the same massively multitask finetuning recipe
to equip BLOOM with multilingual zero-shot task generalization abilities. We refer to the
resulting models as BLOOMZ. To train BLOOMZ, we extended P3 to include new datasets
in languages other than English and new tasks, such as translation. This resulted in xP3,
a collection of prompts for 83 datasets covering 46 languages and 16 tasks. As highlighted
in Figure 4, xP3 mirrors the language distribution of ROOTS. Tasks in xP3 are both cross-
lingual (e.g. translation) and monolingual (e.g. summarization, question answering). We
used PromptSource to collect these prompts, adding additional metadata to the prompts,
such as input and target languages. To study the importance of multilingual prompts,
we also machine-translated English prompts in xP3 to the respective dataset languages to
produce a collection called xP3mt. Further details on the prompt collection for xP3 and
xP3mt are given in Muennighoff et al. (2022b).
3.2 Model Architecture
This section discusses our design methodology and the architecture of the BLOOM model.
In-depth studies and experiments can be found in Le Scao et al. (2022) and Wang et al.
(2022a). We first review our design methodology, then motivate our choice of training a
causaldecoder-onlymodel. Finally, wejustifythe waysthatourmodelarchitecture deviates
from standard practice.
3.2.1 Design Methodology
Thedesignspaceofpossiblearchitecturesisimmense, makingexhaustiveexplorationimpos-
sible. One option would be to exactly replicate the architecture of an existing large language
model. On the other hand, a great deal of work on improving existing architectures has
seen relatively little adoption (Narang et al., 2021); adopting some of these recommended
practices could yield a significantly better model. We take a middle ground and focus on
model families that have been shown to scale well, and that have reasonable support in
publicly available tools and codebases. We ablate components and hyperparameters of the
models, seeking to make the best use of our final compute budget.
Experimental Design for Ablations One of the main draws of LLMs has been their
ability to perform tasks in a “zero/few-shot” way: large enough models can perform novel
tasks simply from in-context instructions and examples (Radford et al., 2019), without ded-
16.github.com/bigscience-workshop/promptsource
14BLOOM
icated training on supervised samples. Accordingly, and because finetuning a 100B+ model
is unwieldy, we focused our evaluation of architectural decisions on zero-shot generalization,
and do not consider transfer learning. Specifically, we measured zero-shot performance on
diverse aggregates of tasks: 29 tasks from the EleutherAI Language Model Evaluation Har-
ness (EAI-Eval, Gao et al. (2021)), and 9 tasks from the evaluation set of T0 (T0-Eval, Sanh
et al. (2022)). There is significant overlap between the two: only one task from T0-Eval
(StoryCloze) is not in EAI-Eval, although all prompts between the two are different. See
Le Scao et al. (2022) for a detailed list of tasks and baselines. We also note that our tasks
aggregates share 17 of the 31 tasks of the evaluation of GPT-3 (Brown et al., 2020).
We conducted our ablation experiments using smaller models. We used the 6.7B pa-
rameter scale for the pretraining objective ablations (Wang et al., 2022a) and the 1.3B scale
for the rest including position embeddings, activations, and layer normalization (Le Scao
et al., 2022). Recently, Dettmers et al. (2022) identified a phase transition for models larger
than 6.7B, in which the emergence of “outliers features” is observed. This questions whether
results obtained at the 1.3B scale should be assumed to extrapolate to our final model size.
Out-of-scope Architectures We did not consider mixture-of-experts (MoE) (Shazeer
et al., 2017), due to a lack of widely used GPU-based codebases suitable for training them
at scale. Similarly, we also did not consider state-space models (Gu et al., 2020). At the
time of the design of BLOOM, they consistently underperformed in natural language tasks
(Gu et al., 2021). Both of these approaches are promising, and have now demonstrated
competitive results–at large scales for MoE (Fedus et al., 2022; Srivastava et al., 2022), and
at smaller scale for state-space models with H3 (Fu et al., 2023).
3.2.2 Architecture and Pretraining Objective
Although most modern language models are based on the Transformer architecture, there
aresignificantdeviationsbetweenarchitecturalimplementations. Notably,whiletheoriginal
Transformer is based on an encoder-decoder architecture, many popular models have opted
for encoder-only (e.g. BERT, (Devlin et al., 2019)) or decoder-only (e.g. GPT, (Radford
et al., 2018)) approaches. Currently, all state-of-the-art language models over 100 billion
parameters are causal decoder-only models (Brown et al., 2020; Rae et al., 2021; Chowdhery
et al., 2022). This is in opposition to the findings of Raffel et al. (2020), in which encoder-
decoder models significantly outperform decoder-only models for transfer learning.
Prior to our work, the literature was lacking a systematic evaluation of the zero-shot
generalization capabilities of different architectures and pretraining objectives. We explored
this question in Wang et al. (2022a) where we evaluated encoder-decoder and decoder-only
architectures and their interactions with causal, prefix, and masked language modeling
pretraining objectives. Our results show that immediately after pretraining, causal decoder-
only models performed best – validating the choice of state-of-the-art LLMs. Furthermore,
they can be more efficiently adapted after pretraining to a non-causal architecture and
objective–an approach which has been further explored and confirmed by Tay et al. (2022).
3.2.3 Modeling Details
Beyond choosing an architecture and pretraining objective, a number of changes to the
original Transformer architecture have been proposed. For example, alternative positional
15BigScience Workshop
embeddingschemes(Suetal.,2021;Pressetal.,2021)ornovelactivationfunctions(Shazeer,
2020). We thus performed a series of experiments to evaluate the benefit of each of these
modifications for a causal decoder-only model in Le Scao et al. (2022). We adopted two
architectural deviations in BLOOM:
ALiBi Positional Embeddings Instead of adding positional information to the embed-
ding layer, ALiBi directly attenuates the attention scores based on how far away the keys
and queries are (Press et al., 2021). Although ALiBi was initially motivated by its abil-
ity to extrapolate to longer sequences, we found it also led to smoother training and better
downstream performance even at the original sequence length – outperforming both learned
(Vaswani et al., 2017) and rotary (Su et al., 2021) embeddings.
Embedding LayerNorm In preliminary experiments training a 104B parameters model,
we experimented with an additional layer normalization immediately after the embedding
layer – as recommended by the bitsandbytes17library (Dettmers et al., 2022) with its
StableEmbedding layer. We found this significantly improved training stability. Even
though we also found it penalizes zero-shot generalization in Le Scao et al. (2022), we train
BLOOM with an additional layer normalization after the first embedding layer to avoid
training instabilities. Note the preliminary 104B experiments were conducted in float16,
while the final training was in bfloat16 . Since then, float16 has been attributed as being
responsible for many of the observed instabilities in training LLMs (Zhang et al., 2022; Zeng
et al., 2022). It is possible that bfloat16 alleviates the need for the embedding LayerNorm.
We represent the full architecture of BLOOM in figure 5 for reference.
LNMLP
LN+
+LNMLP
LN+
+
+softmaxvalue combination
+ +
key-query productvalue combination
key-query product+ +softmax
Token1Token2Token3Embed Embed EmbedLN LN LN
Decoder Block (x 70)Softmax Softmax Softmax
Multi-Head AttentionLNMLP
⋅  khead
LN+
+
+SoftmaxWeighted sum of values
+ +
Key-query product+0
0
0-1
-1-2ALIBI mask
-∞-∞
-∞EmbedTEmbedTEmbedT
LN LN LNHead fusion
Figure 5: The BLOOM architecture. The kheadslope parameters for ALIBI are taken as
2−8i
nwith nthe number of heads and i∈1,2, ..., n.
17.github.com/TimDettmers/bitsandbytes
16BLOOM
3.3 Tokenization
The design decisions when training a tokenizer are often neglected in favour of “default”
settings (Mielke et al., 2021). For instance, OPT (Zhang et al., 2022) and GPT-3 (Brown
et al., 2020) both use GPT-2’s tokenizer, trained for English. This can be justified by the
fact that evaluating the impact of a particular choice on the downstream performance of
the model is constrained by the large computational costs of training. However, the diverse
natureofBLOOM’strainingdatarequirescarefuldesignchoicestoensurethatthetokenizer
encodes sentences in a lossless manner.
Validation Weusethefertility(Ács,2019)ofourtokenizercomparedtoexistingmonolin-
gual tokenizers as a metric for sanity checks. Fertility is defined as the number of subwords
created per word or per dataset by the tokenizer, which we measured using subsets of
Universal Dependencies 2.9 (Nivre et al., 2017) and OSCAR (Ortiz Suárez et al., 2019) in
the languages of interest. A very high fertility on a language compared to a monolingual
tokenizer may indicate a degradation on the downstream multilingual performance of the
model(Rustetal.,2021). Ourgoalwastonotdegradethefertilityoneachlanguagebymore
than 10 percentage points when comparing our multilingual tokenizer with monolingual to-
kenizers in corresponding languages. For all experiments, the Hugging Face Tokenizers
library (Moi et al., 2019) was used to design and train the tested tokenizers.
Tokenizer fr en es zh hi ar
Monolingual 1.30 1.15 1.12 1.50 1.07 1.16
BLOOM 1.17 (-11%)1.15 (+0%)1.16 (+3%)1.58 (+5%)1.18 (+9%)1.34 (+13%)
Table 2: Fertilities obtained on Universal Dependencies treebanks on languages with ex-
isting monolingual tokenizers. The monolingual tokenizers we used were the ones from
CamemBERT (Martin et al., 2020), GPT-2 (Radford et al., 2019), DeepESP/gpt2-spanish ,
bert-base-chinese ,monsoon-nlp/hindi-bert and Arabic BERT (Safaya et al., 2020), all
available on the HuggingFace Hub.
Tokenizer Training Data We initially used a non-deduplicated subset of ROOTS. How-
ever, a qualitative study on the vocabulary of the tokenizer revealed issues in its training
data. For instance, in earlier versions of the tokenizer, we found entire URLs stored as
tokens caused by several documents containing a high number of duplicates. These issues
motivated us to remove duplicated lines in the tokenizer training training data. We then
applied the same sampling ratios per language as for the training data.
Vocabulary Size A large vocabulary size reduces the risk of over-segmenting some sen-
tences, especially for low-resource languages. We conducted validation experiments using
150k and 250k vocabulary sizes to make comparisons with existing multilingual modeling
literature easier (Conneau et al., 2020; Xue et al., 2021). We ultimately settled for a vo-
cabulary of 250k tokens to reach our initial fertility objective compared to monolingual
tokenizers. Since the vocabulary size determines the embedding matrix size, it also had to
17BigScience Workshop
be divisible by 128 for GPU efficiency reasons and by 4 to be able to use Tensor Parallelism.
We used a final size of 250,680 vocabulary items with 200 tokens reserved for possible future
applications such as removing private information using placeholder tokens.
Byte-levelBPE ThetokenizerisalearnedsubwordtokenizertrainedusingtheBytePair
Encoding (BPE) algorithm introduced by Gage (1994). In order not to lose information
during tokenization, the tokenizer creates merges starting from bytes as the smallest units
insteadofcharacters(Radfordetal.,2019). Thisway, tokenizationneverresultsinunknown
tokensbecauseall256bytescanbecontainedinthevocabularyofthetokenizer. Inaddition,
Byte-level BPE maximizes vocabulary sharing between languages (Wang et al., 2020).
Normalization Upstream of the BPE tokenization algorithm, no normalization of the
text was performed in order to have the most general model possible. In all cases, we
observed that adding unicode normalization such as NFKC did not reduce the fertility by
more than 0.8% on all the languages considered but came at the cost of making the model
less general; for example, causing 22and22to be encoded in the same way.
Pre-tokenizer Our pre-tokenization has two goals: producing a first division of the text
(usually using whitespaces and punctuation) and restricting the maximum length of se-
quences of tokens produced by the BPE algorithm. The pre-tokenization rule used was the
following regex: “
 ”18which splits words apart while preserving all
the characters and in particular the sequences of spaces and line breaks that are crucial for
programming languages. We do not use English-centric splits common in other tokenizers
(e.g. splitting around ’ntor’ll). We also didn’t use splits on numbers and digits, which
caused issues in Arabic and code.
3.4 Engineering
3.4.1 Hardware
The model was trained on Jean Zay,19a French government-funded supercomputer owned
by GENCI and operated at IDRIS, the national computing center for the French National
Center for Scientific Research (CNRS). Training BLOOM took about 3.5 months to com-
plete and consumed 1,082,990 compute hours. Training was conducted on 48 nodes, each
having 8 NVIDIA A100 80GB GPUs (a total of 384 GPUs); due to possible hardware
failures during training, we also maintained a reserve of 4 spare nodes. The nodes were
equipped with 2x AMD EPYC 7543 32-Core CPUs and 512 GB of RAM, while the storage
was handled by mix of full flash and hard disk drives using a SpectrumScale (GPFS) parallel
file system shared between all nodes and users of the supercomputer. 4 NVLink GPU-to-
GPU interconnects per node enabled intra-node communications while 4 Omni-Path 100
Gbps links per node, arranged in an enhanced hypercube 8D global topology, were used for
inter-node communications.
18.github.com/bigscience-workshop/bs-tokenizers
19.idris.fr/eng/jean-zay/jean-zay-presentation-eng.html
18BLOOM
3.4.2 Framework
BLOOM was trained using Megatron-DeepSpeed20(Smith et al., 2022), a framework for
large-scale distributed training. It consists of two parts: Megatron-LM21(Shoeybi et al.,
2019) provides the Transformer implementation, tensor parallelism, and data loading prim-
itives, whereas DeepSpeed22(Rasley et al., 2020) provides the ZeRO optimizer, model
pipelining, and general distributed training components. This framework allows us to train
efficiently with 3D parallelism (Narayanan et al., 2021, shown in Figure 6), a fusion of three
complementary approaches to distributed training. These approaches are described below:
Figure 6: DP+PP+TP combination leads to 3D parallelism.
Data parallelism (DP) replicates the model multiple times, with each replica placed on
a different device and fed a slice of the data. The processing is done in parallel and
all model replicas are synchronized at the end of each training step.
Tensor parallelism (TP) partitions individual layers of the model across multiple de-
vices. This way, instead of having the whole activation or gradient tensor reside on
a single GPU, we place shards of this tensor on separate GPUs. This technique is
sometimes called horizontal parallelism or intra-layer model parallelism.
Pipeline parallelism (PP) splits up the model’s layers across multiple GPUs, so that
only a fraction of the layers of the model are placed on each GPU. This is sometimes
called vertical parallelism.
Finally, the Zero Redundancy Optimizer (ZeRO; Rajbhandari et al., 2020) allows different
processes to only hold a fraction of data (parameters, gradients, and optimizer states)
20.github.com/bigscience-workshop/Megatron-DeepSpeed
21.github.com/NVIDIA/Megatron-LM
22.github.com/microsoft/DeepSpeed
19BigScience Workshop
required for a training step. We used ZeRO stage 1, meaning that only the optimizer states
are sharded in this manner.
Thefourcomponentsdescribedabovearecombinedtogethertoallowscalingtohundreds
of GPUs with extremely high GPU utilization. We were able to achieve 156 TFLOPs in
our fastest configuration with A100 GPUs, attaining our objective of half of the theoretical
peak performance of 312 TFLOPs (in float32 orbfloat16 ).
3.4.3 Floating Point Format
In earlier experiments with 104B-parameter models on NVIDIA V100 GPUs, we observed
numerical instabilities that caused irreversible training divergences. We hypothesize that
these instabilities stem from our initial use of IEEE float16 — a 16-bit floating point
format with a very limited dynamic range that can cause overflows. The NVIDIA A100
GPUs that we ultimately had access to support the bfloat16 format (Wang and Kanwar,
2019; Kalamkar et al., 2019), which has the same dynamic range as float32. On the other
hand, bfloat16 still has much lower precision, which motivated our use of mixed-precision
training (Micikevicius et al., 2018). This technique performs certain precision-sensitive
operations such as gradient accumulation and softmax in float32 precision and the rest
of operations in lower precision, allowing us to achieve a balance of high performance and
training stability. Ultimately, we performed final training in bfloat16 mixed precision,
which proved to solve the instability problem (in line with previous observation by Smith
et al., 2022).
3.4.4 Fused CUDA Kernels
In general, GPUs cannot retrieve data to perform computations on and perform these
computations at the same time. Moreover, the compute performance of modern GPUs is
much higher than the speed of memory transfer required for every operation (often called a
kernelin GPU programming). Kernel fusion (Wu et al., 2012) is an approach for optimizing
GPU-based computations by performing several consecutive operations in only one kernel
call. This approach offers a way to minimize data transfers: intermediary results stay in
the GPU register instead of being copied into VRAM, saving overhead.
We used several custom fused CUDA kernels provided by Megatron-LM. First, we used
anoptimizedkerneltoperformLayerNorm, aswellaskernelstofusevariouscombinationsof
the scaling, masking, and softmax operations. The addition of a bias term is also fused with
the GeLU activation using the JIT functionality of PyTorch. As an example consequence
of the use of fused kernels, adding the bias term in the GeLU operation adds no additional
time, as the operation is memory-bound: the additional computation is negligible compared
to data transfers between GPU VRAM and registers, so fusing both operations essentially
halves their runtime.
3.4.5 Additional Challenges
Scaling to 384 GPUs required two final changes: disabling asynchronous CUDA kernel
launches (for ease of debugging and to prevent deadlocks) and splitting parameter groups
into smaller subgroups (to avoid excessive CPU memory allocations).
20BLOOM
During training, we faced issues with hardware failures: on average, 1–2 GPU failures
occurred each week. As backup nodes were available and automatically used, and check-
points were saved every three hours, this did not affect training throughput significantly.
A PyTorch deadlock bug in the data loader and disk space issues led to 5–10h downtimes.
Given the relative sparsity of engineering issues, and since there was only one loss spike,
which the model swiftly recovered from, human intervention was less necessary than in com-
parable projects (Zhang et al., 2022). Full details of our experience with training BLOOM
and a detailed report of all issues we faced are publicly available.23
3.5 Training
Hyperparameter ( ↓)BLOOM-560M BLOOM-1.1B BLOOM-1.7B BLOOM-3B BLOOM-7.1B BLOOM
Architecture hyperparameters
Parameters 559M 1,065M 1,722M 3,003M 7,069M 176,247M
Precision float16 bfloat16
Layers 24 24 24 30 30 70
Hidden dim. 1024 1536 2048 2560 4096 14336
Attention heads 16 16 16 32 32 112
Vocab size 250,680 250,680
Sequence length 2048 2048
Activation GELU GELU
Position emb. Alibi Alibi
Tied emb. True True
Pretraining hyperparameters
Global Batch Size 256 256 512 512 512 2048
Learning rate 3.0e-4 2.5e-4 2e-4 1.6e-4 1.2e-4 6e-5
Total tokens 341B 366B
Warmup tokens 375M 375M
Decay tokens 410B 410B
Decay style cosine cosine
Min. learning rate 1e-5 6e-6
Adam (β1, β2) (0.9, 0.95) (0.9, 0.95)
Weight decay 1e-1 1e-1
Gradient clipping 1.0 1.0
Multitask finetuning hyperparameters
Global Batch Size 1024 1024 2048 2048 2048 2048
Learning rate 2.0e-5 2.0e-5 2.0e-5 2.0e-5 2.0e-5 2.0e-5
Total tokens 13B 13B
Warmup tokens 0 0
Decay style constant constant
Weight decay 1e-4 1e-4
Table 3: BLOOM & BLOOMZ Training Hyperparameters.
23.github.com/bigscience-workshop/bigscience/blob/master/train/tr11-176B-ml/chronicles.md
21BigScience Workshop
Pretrained Models We train six size variants of BLOOM with respective hyperparam-
eters detailed in Table 3. Architecture and training hyperparameters come from our ex-
perimental results (Le Scao et al., 2022) and prior work on training large language models
(Brown et al., 2020; Kaplan et al., 2020). Model depth and width for the non-176B models
roughly follow previous literature (Brown et al., 2020; Zhang et al., 2022), deviating for
3B and 7.1B in order only to fit the models more easily on our training setup. Embed-
ding parameter sizes are larger for BLOOM owing to the larger multilingual vocabulary,
but scaling literature discounts embedding operations (Kaplan et al., 2020). During the
development process at the 104B parameters scale, we experimented with different values
of Adam βparameters, weight decay and gradient clipping to target stability, but did not
find it helpful. For all models, we use a cosine learning rate decay schedule (Loshchilov
and Hutter, 2016) over 410B tokens, taken as an upper bound for the length of training if
compute permitted, and warmup for 375M tokens. We use weight decay, gradient clipping,
and no dropout. The ROOTS dataset contains around 341 billion tokens of text, so we
aimed to train all models for the equivalent amount of tokens. However, in light of revised
scaling laws published during training (Hoffmann et al., 2022), we decided to train the large
models for an additional 25 billion tokens on repeated data. As warmup tokens + decay
tokens were larger than the total number of tokens, the end of learning rate decay was never
reached.
Multitask Finetuning Finetuned BLOOMZ models (Muennighoff et al., 2022b) main-
tain the same architecture hyperparameters as BLOOM models. The finetuning hyperpa-
rameters are loosely based on T0 (Sanh et al., 2022) and FLAN (Wei et al., 2021). Learning
rates are determined by doubling the minimum learning rate of the respective pretrained
model and then rounding. Global batch sizes are multiplied by four for small variants to
increase throughput. While the models are finetuned for 13 billion tokens, the best check-
point is chosen according to a separate validation set. We found performance to plateau
after 1 – 6 billion tokens of finetuning.
ContrastiveFinetuning Wealsoperformcontrastivefinetuningofthe1.3and7.1billion
parameter BLOOM models using the SGPT Bi-Encoder recipe (Muennighoff, 2022) to
train models that produce high-quality text embeddings. We created SGPT-BLOOM-7.1B-
msmarco24gearedtowardsmultilingualinformationretrievalandSGPT-BLOOM-1.7B-nli25
for multilingual semantic textual similarity (STS). However, recent benchmarking has found
these models to also generalize to various other embedding tasks, such as bitext mining,
reranking or feature extraction for downstream classification (Muennighoff et al., 2022a).
3.5.1 Carbon Footprint
While most attempts to estimate the carbon footprint of language models have shed light
on the emissions produced due to energy consumed during model training (e.g. Patterson
et al., 2021; Strubell et al., 2019), other sources of emissions are also important to consider.
In our efforts to estimate the carbon emissions of BLOOM, we were inspired by the Life
Cycle Assessment (LCA) approach (Kl¨ opffer, 1997) and aimed to consider aspects such as
24.hf.co/bigscience/sgpt-bloom-7b1-msmarco
25.hf.co/bigscience-data/sgpt-bloom-1b7-nli
22BLOOM
the emissions of equipment manufacturing, intermediate model training, and deployment.
According to our estimates, the carbon emissions from BLOOM training add up to approx-
imately 81 tons of CO 2eq, of which 14% were generated by the equipment manufacturing
process (11 tons), 30% by the energy consumed during training (25 tons) and 55% by idle
consumption of the equipment and computing cluster used for training (45 tons).
Model
nameNumber of
parametersPower
consumptionCO2eq
emissions
GPT-3 175B 1,287 MWh 502 tons
Gopher 280B 1,066 MWh 352 tons
OPT 175B 324 MWh 70 tons
BLOOM 176B 433 MWh 25 tons
Table 4: Comparison of carbon emissions between BLOOM and similar LLMs. Numbers in
italicshave been inferred based on data provided in the papers describing the models.
Comparing the carbon emissions of BLOOM training to other similar models (see
Table 4), reveals that while the energy consumption of BLOOM is slightly higher than
OPT (Zhang et al., 2022) (433 Mwh compared to OPT’s 324 MWh), its emissions are ap-
proximately 2/3 less (25 tons versus 70 tons). This is thanks to the low carbon intensity
of the energy grid used for training BLOOM, which emits 57 gCO 2eq/kWh, compared to
231 gCO 2eq/kWh for the grid used for OPT training. Specifically, France’s national energy
grid (which is used by Jean Zay) is largely powered by nuclear energy, which is low-carbon
compared to grids powered by energy sources such as coal and natural gas. While the
sustainability of nuclear energy is debated, it is one of the least carbon-intensive sources
of energy that is currently available. Both BLOOM and OPT incurred significantly less
carbon emissions than GPT-3 (as reported by (Patterson et al., 2021)), which can be at-
tributed to several factors including more efficient hardware as well as less carbon-intensive
energy sources.
We also pursued further exploration of the carbon footprint of (1) the computation
carried out on Jean Zay within the scope of the Big Science workshop, and (2) running
the BLOOM model API in real time. In terms of the footprint of the totality of the
computation, we estimate that the final BLOOM training represents approximately 37% of
the overall emissions, with other processes such as intermediate training runs and model
evaluation adding up to the other 63%. This is slightly less than the estimate made by
the authors of the OPT paper, who stated that the total carbon footprint of their model is
roughly 2 times higher due to experimentation, baselines and ablation (Zhang et al., 2022).
Our ongoing exploration of the carbon emissions of the BLOOM API have estimated that
the real-time deployment of the model on a GCP instance with 16 GPUs running in the
us-central1 region results in approximately 20 kg of CO 2eq emitted per day of deployment
(or 0.83 kg per hour). This figure is not representative of all deployment use-cases, and
will vary depending on the hardware used as well as the specifics of model implementation
(e.g. whether batching is used) and the number of requests the model receives. Further
information regarding BLOOM’s carbon footprint can be found in Luccioni et al. (2022).
23BigScience Workshop
3.6 Release
Openness has been central to the development of BLOOM and we wanted to ensure it is
easily available for the community to use. As such, we worked on producing documentation
as a Model Card (Mitchell et al., 2019) and a new license addressing specific goals of the
project.
ModelCard Followingbestpracticesforreleasingmachinelearningmodels, theBLOOM
modelhasbeenreleasedalongwithadetailedModelCard26(Mitchelletal.,2019)describing
its technical specifications, details on training, intended-use, out-of-scope uses as well as the
model’slimitations. Participantsacrossworkinggroupsworkedtogethertoproducethefinal
Model Card and similar cards for each checkpoint. The work was collaborative, primarily
composed “live” by thinking through and discussing each section, then further dividing into
subsections based on the categorizations and distinctions participants naturally ended up
creating throughout discussions.
Licensing Being mindful of the potentially harmful use-cases that BLOOM could en-
able, we chose to strike a balance between unrestricted open-access and responsible-use by
including behavioral-use clauses (Contractor et al., 2022) to limit the application of the
model towards potentially harmful use-cases. Such clauses are routinely being included in a
growing class of “Responsible AI Licenses (RAIL)”27that the community has been adopting
when releasing their models.28A distinguishing aspect of the RAIL license developed for
BLOOM is that it separates licensing of the “source code” and “model”, as referenced by its
trained parameters. It further includes detailed definitions of “use” and “derived works” of
the model to ensure that anticipated downstream use by prompting, finetuning, distillation,
use of logits and probability distributions are explicitly identified. The license contains 13
behavioral-use restrictions that have been identified based on the intended uses and lim-
itations described in the BLOOM Model Card, as well as the BigScience ethical charter.
The license offers the model at no charge and users are free to use the model as long as
they comply with the terms (including usage restrictions). The source code for BLOOM
has been made available under an Apache 2.0 open source license.
4. Evaluation
Our evaluations focus on zero-shot and few-shot settings. Our goal is to present an accurate
picture of how BLOOM compares to existing LLMs in settings that most realistically reflect
the way the models are likely to be used in practice. Because of the scale of these models,
prompt-based adaptation and few-shot “in-context learning” are currently more common
than finetuning. Thus, we report results on a range of tasks - SuperGLUE 4.2, machine
translation 4.3, summarization 4.4 - and languages in zero-shot and one-shot prompt-based
settings, as well as after multitask finetuning (Section 4.7). We also perform code gener-
ation 4.5, use BLOOM-derived text embeddings for representation tasks 4.8 and interpret
BLOOM’sgeneralizationabilitiesfromtheperspectiveofmultilingualprobing(Section4.9).
26.hf.co/bigscience/bloom
27.licenses.ai
28.the-turing-way.netlify.app/reproducible-research/licensing/licensing-ml.html
24BLOOM
4.1 Experimental Design
4.1.1 Prompts
Based on recent research on the impact of prompting on language model performance, we
decided to build a language model evaluation suite that allowed us to vary both the basic
task data as well as the prompting that is used to contextualize the task. Our prompts
were developed prior to BLOOM’s release, and did not undergo any a priori refinement
using models. That is, the prompts we use in our evaluation are ones that humans believed
were a reasonable way to solicit the desired task behavior from a language model. Our
goal for designing prompts in this way is to simulate realistic zero-shot or one-shot results
that a new user could expect from BLOOM. This is in contrast to presenting best-case
performances that might result from multiple rounds of trial-and-error on prompt design.
We choose to report the former because the latter is harder to reproduce systematically, is
arguably a less representative picture of how the model works in the average setting, and
is not representative of true zero-shot learning where no labeled data is available.
We generate multiple prompts per task using promptsource (Bach et al., 2022). We
follow the procedure used by Sanh et al. (2022), in which prompt generation is crowd-
sourced, and thus we see substantial variety in length and style across prompts. To improve
quality and clarity, multiple peer reviews were performed on each prompt for artifacts and
consistency.
Table 5 shows examples of the resulting prompts used for the WMT’14 task. We also
generate prompts for many tasks that are not included in this paper due to resource con-
straints. All of our prompts for all tasks (both those analyzed in the paper and those not
yet analyzed) are publicly available.29
Prompt name Prompt Target
a_good_translation-source+target Given the following source text: [source sentence], a good L2 translation is: [target sentence]
gpt3-target What is the L2 translation of the sentence: [source sentence]? [target sentence]
version-target if the original version says [source sentence]; then the L2 version should say: [target sentence]
xglm-source+target L1: [source sentence] = L2: [target sentence]
Table 5: Four prompts for the WMT’14 dataset (Bojar et al., 2014) for MT evaluation.
Above, “L1” and “L2” are replaced with language names (e.g. “Bengali” and “Russian”).
4.1.2 Infrastructure
Our framework extends EleutherAI’s Language Model Evaluation Harness (Gao et al.,
2021) by integrating it with the promptsource (Bach et al., 2022) library described in
Section 3.1.4. We release our Prompted Language Model Evaluation Harness as an open
source library for people to use. We use this framework in order to run the experiments
and aggregate results.
29.github.com/bigscience-workshop/promptsource/tree/eval-hackathon
25BigScience Workshop
4.1.3 Datasets
SuperGLUE We use a subset of the SuperGLUE (Wang et al., 2019) evaluation suite of
classification tasks, specifically: Ax-b, Ax-g, BoolQ, CB, WiC, WSC, and RTE tasks. We
excluded the remaining tasks because they require an order of magntiude more compute
to run than all of these tasks we consider combined. These tasks are English-only, and
are thus included to facilitate comparison with prior work, which has primarily focused on
English-only models. We also note that performance on these tasks has not yet been widely
reported using zero- and one-shot prompt-based setting. T0 (Sanh et al., 2022) is the first
exception, but that model is instruction-tuned and thus not directly comparable to models
like BLOOM and OPT. For each task, we select a random sample of five prompts from
promptsource and evaluate all models on that set of prompts. As with other prompting
tasks in Evaluation Harness (Gao et al., 2021), the prediction of a model for a given prompt
is measured using the maximum log likelihood among a set of specified candidate label
strings associated with the prompt.
Machine Translation (MT) We evaluate BLOOM on three datasets (using ISO-639-1
codes to refer to languages): WMT14 en ↔fr and en ↔hi (Bojar et al., 2014), Flores-101
(Goyal et al., 2022) and DiaBLa (Bawden et al., 2020). We evaluate using the sacrebleu
(Post, 2018) implementation of BLEU (Papineni et al., 2002), using default tokenisation
for WMT and DiaBLa and spm-flores-101 for Flores.30We use greedy decoding with
generation proceeding until the EOS token, or additionally \n###\n for the 1-shot case.
The maximum generation length was set per dataset to be in line with what is typically
used in the literature; specifically, 64 tokens for WMT14 and 512 tokens for Flores-101 and
DiaBla. Task-specific experimental design details are below.
Summarization We evaluate summarization on the WikiLingua (Ladhak et al., 2020)
dataset. WikiLingua is a multilingual summarization dataset comprising WikiHow article
and step-by-step summary pairs. Pairs are aligned across multiple languages, with transla-
tionofsourceandsummaryfurtherreviewedbyaninternationaltranslationteam. One-shot
conditional natural language generation has typically not been reported by models with size
comparable to BLOOM. PaLM (Chowdhery et al., 2022) is the first exception, and reports
scores on WikiLingua; however, only the model’s ability to summarize in English was ex-
amined (-> en). By contrast, we opted to test BLOOM’s inherent multilingual ability by
assessing the abstractive summarization in the source language (e.g. vi -> vi). We focus
on the nine languages (Arabic, English, Spanish, French, Hindi, Indonesian, Portuguese,
Vietnamese and Chinese) which were amongst those targeted as part of the BigScience
effort.
Natural language generation is notoriously challenging to evaluate, with multilingual
generation compounding this challenge due to a lack of metric support. Following the sug-
gestions by Gehrmann et al. (2022b), we report ROUGE-2, ROUGE-L (Lin, 2004),31and
Levenshtein distance. One important modification to ROUGE is using the SentencePiece
tokenizer (Kudo and Richardson, 2018) built from the Flores-101 dataset (Goyal et al.,
30. BLEU+case:mixed+numrefs.1+smooth.exp+{13a,tok:spm-flores}+version:2.2.1
31. For ROUGE, we used the Python implementation at
github.com/google-research/google-research/rouge , commit f935042.
26BLOOM
2022). A naive approach would use a tokenizer based on English, but using a multilingual
tokenizer improves the capacity to measure the fidelity of multilingual generations. To min-
imize inference time of the model we use the subsamples from the updated GEM benchmark
(Gehrmann et al., 2022a) (3000 uniformly sampled test examples). The authors note that
there is minimal difference when comparing model performance between the subsamples
and the full test sets. For decoding and generation, we use the same procedure as described
above for MT.
4.1.4 Baseline Models
We use the following baseline models where appropriate (e.g. in settings where they support
the language of the evaluation dataset):
•mGPT (Shliazhko et al., 2022), GPT-style models trained on 60 languages from
Wikipedia and Common Crawl
•GPT-Neo (Black et al.), GPT-J-6B (Wang and Komatsuzaki, 2021), and GPT-NeoX
(Black et al., 2022), a family of GPT-style models trained on The Pile (Gao et al.,
2020)
•T0 (Sanh et al., 2022), a variant of T5 (Raffel et al., 2020) that underwent multitask
prompted finetuning on datasets from P3 (Bach et al., 2022)
•OPT (Zhang et al., 2022), a family of GPT-style model trained on a mixture of
datasets including those from RoBERTa Liu et al. (2019) and The Pile (Gao et al.,
2020)
•XGLM (Lin et al., 2021), a GPT-style multilingual model trained on a variant of
CC100 (Conneau et al., 2020)
•M2M (Fan et al., 2021), a massively multilingual model trained to translate between
100 languages
•AlexaTM (Soltan et al., 2022), an encoder-decoder model trained on a mixture of
masked and causal language modeling on data from Wikipedia and mC4 (Xue et al.,
2021)
•mTk-Instruct(Wangetal.,2022b),avariantofT5thatunderwentmultitaskprompted
finetuning on datasets from Super-NaturalInstructions
•Codex (Chen et al., 2021), a family of GPT models finetuned on code from GitHub
•GPT-fr (Simoulin and Crabbé, 2021), a GPT-style model trained on French text
4.2 SuperGLUE
Figure 7 shows zero- and one-shot performance on SuperGLUE. In both settings, on en-
tailment tasks (BoolQ and CB), performance is well above random chance for BLOOM,
T0, OPT, and GPT-J. On other tasks, while the best prompts do better, the average per-
formance across prompts hovers around chance, suggesting that the success of individual
27BigScience Workshop
promptsisprimarilystatisticalvariation. ThereissomesignalforBLOOMinthediagnostic
(Ax-b and Ax-g) datasets. The exception is the T0 model, which shows strong performance.
However, this model is finetuned in the multitask setting (similar to BLOOMZ, see Sec-
tion 4.7) in order to improve performance in zero-shot prompting settings, and thus is not
directly comparable to the other models shown here.
As models go from zero-shot to one-shot, variability is reduced across all prompts and
models and performance slightly and inconsistently increases. Notably, BLOOM sees more
of an increase in performance than comparable models when going from zero-shot to one-
shot, as it is generally behind OPT in the zero-shot setting but matches or improves on it
in the one-shot setting, even though it has only partly been trained on English. This may
be because a multilingual language model gains more certainty in the language of input and
output with a longer context.
020406080100
020406080100
020406080100
020406080100
020406080100
020406080100
020406080100
020406080100
020406080100
020406080100
020406080100
020406080100
mGPT (1.3B)
 GPT-J (6B)
 T0 (1 1B)
 OPT (175B)
 BLOOM (176B)
Ax-b Ax-g BoolQ CB WiC WSC
Ax-b Ax-g BoolQ CB WiC WSCSuperGLUE 0-shot
SuperGLUE 1-shot
Figure 7: Performance of various LLMs on subset of tasks from SuperGLUE benchmark in
zero- and one-shot prompt-based setting.
We perform an additional analysis comparing BLOOM models across model sizes. As
a baseline, we also measure the average one-shot accuracy of OPT models of similar sizes
(350M parameters to 175B parameters).32Figure 8 shows the accuracy of each prompt
on each task across model scales. Both OPT and BLOOM model families improve very
slightly with scale, with only models over 2 billion parameters showing signal, and there is
no consistent difference between families across all tasks. In the 1-shot setting, BLOOM-
176BisaheadofOPT-175BonAx-b, CB,WSCandWiC,andmatchesitontheothertasks,
suggestingthatmultilingualitydoesnotlimitperformanceofBLOOMonEnglish-onlytasks
in the zero-shot setting.
32. We do not evaluate OPT-66B because of the lack of a similarly-sized BLOOM model.
28BLOOM
2 5 1B2 5 10B2 5 100B2020406080100
2 5 1B2 5 10B2 5 100B2020406080100
2 5 1B2 5 10B2 5 100B2020406080100
2 5 1B2 5 10B2 5 100B2020406080100
2 5 1B2 5 10B2 5 100B2020406080100
2 5 1B2 5 10B2 5 100B2020406080100
OPT
 BLOOM
Ax-b Ax-g BoolQ
CB W iC WSCSuperGLUE 1-shot
Figure 8: Comparison of the scaling of BLOOM versus OPT on each SuperGLUE one-shot
task. Each point represents the average accuracy of a model within the BLOOM or OPT
family of models on one of the five task prompts. The number of parameters on the x-axis
is presented in log-scale.
4.3 Machine Translation
In addition to the results presented here, a more detailed analysis of BLOOM’s MT quality
can be found in (Bawden and Yvon, 2023).
4.3.1 WMT
WMTresultsforBLOOM-176Binthezero-shotand1-shotsettingaregiveninTable6. The
best prompts tend to be the more verbose ones; the “version-target” prompt is consistently
betterandthe“gpt3-target” and“xglm-source+target” promptshaveverypoorperformance,
especially for zero-shot. In the one-shot setting, BLOOM can, with the right prompt,
perform competent translation, although it is behind dedicated (supervised) models such
as M2M-100 (43.8 BLEU for English →French and 40.4 for French →English, compared to
34.2 and 35.4 BLEU for BLOOM). The two major problems observed, particularly in the
zero-shot setting, are (i) over-generation and (ii) not producing the correct language (an
29BigScience Workshop
obvious prerequisite for a good translation). Both of these aspects are greatly improved as
the number of few-shot examples is increased.
Prompt en →fr fr →en en →hi hi →en
Shots 0 1 0 1 0 1 0 1
a_good_translation-source+target 15.38 36.39 14.15 36.56 1.90 14.49 10.19 24.60
gpt3-target 7.90 32.55 12.73 33.14 0.26 6.51 0.66 9.98
version-target 21.96 34.22 26.79 35.42 1.96 13.95 11.48 25.80
xglm-source+target 14.91 27.83 15.52 34.51 6.80 13.62 12.05 25.04
Table 6: WMT’14 zero- and one-shot results (BLEU) for BLOOM-176B. The prompts used
are described in Table 5.
4.3.2 DiaBLa
en→fr fr →en
1-shot context Truncate BLEU COMET BLEU COMET
Rand.× 5.7 0.342 12.1 0.614
✓ 37.60.634 41.40.757
Prev.× 6.1 0.328 12.3 0.617
✓ 38.5 0.61441.6 0.751
Table 7: DiaBLa 1-shot results (BLEU) for the “xglm-source+target” prompt when using
the previous or a random sentence as the 1-shot example (with and without truncation of
outputs). In bold the best results for each direction.
Table 7 shows results testing the use of linguistic context with DiaBLa, a parallel dataset
of informal bilingual dialogues. In a 1-shot context and using the “xglm-source+target”
prompt, we compare the effect of using a random test set example as the 1-shot example
versus using the previous dialogue utterance. In light of the overgeneration issues seen
and in order to evaluate the quality of the prediction independently of overgeneration, we
report results for both original outputs and after applying a custom truncation function.33
The automatic results are inconclusive, with little difference between scores (BLEU scores
are higher for previous context but COMET scores are lower). Despite these results, there
is evidence in the predictions themselves that the model is able to use the context of the
1-shot example to make translation choices. See (Bawden and Yvon, 2023) for examples
and further analysis.
30BLOOM
Src↓Trg→ en bn hi sw yo
enBLOOM – 24.6 27.2 20.5 2.6
M2M – 23.0 28.1 26.9 2.2
bnBLOOM 29.9 – 16.3 – –
M2M 22.9 – 21.8 – –
hiBLOOM 35.1 23.8 – – –
M2M 27.9 21.8 – – –
swBLOOM 37.4 – – – 1.3
M2M 30.4 – – – 1.3
yoBLOOM 4.1 – – 0.9 –
M2M 4.2 – – 1.9 –
(a) Low-resource languagesSrc↓Trg→ ca es fr gl it pt
caBLOOM – 28.9 33.8 19.2 19.8 33.0
M2M – 25.2 35.1 33.4 25.5 35.2
esBLOOM 31.2 – 24.8 23.3 16.5 29.1
M2M 23.1 – 29.3 27.5 23.9 28.1
frBLOOM 37.2 27.5 – 24.9 24.0 38.9
M2M 28.7 25.6 – 32.8 28.6 37.8
glBLOOM 37.5 27.1 33.8 – 18.3 32.2
M2M 30.1 27.6 37.1 – 26.9 34.8
itBLOOM 31.0 25.4 31.4 20.2 – 29.2
M2M 25.2 29.2 34.4 29.2 – 31.5
ptBLOOM 39.6 28.1 40.3 27.1 20.1 –
M2M 30.7 26.9 40.2 33.8 28.1 –
(b) Romance languages
Src↓Trg→ ar en es fr zh
arBLOOM – 40.3 23.3 33.1 17.7
M2M – 25.5 16.7 25.7 13.1
AlexaTM – 41.8 23.2 35.5 –
enBLOOM 28.2 – 29.4 45.0 26.7
M2M 17.9 – 25.6 42.0 19.3
AlexaTM 32.0 – 31.0 50.7 –
esBLOOM 18.8 32.7 – 24.8 20.9
M2M 12.1 25.1 – 29.3 14.9
AlexaTM 20.8 34.6 – 33.4 –
frBLOOM 23.4 45.6 27.5 – 23.2
M2M 15.4 37.2 25.6 – 17.6
AlexaTM 24.7 47.1 26.3 – –
zhBLOOM 15.0 30.5 20.5 26.0 –
M2M 11.55 20.9 16.9 24.3 –
AlexaTM – – – – –
(c) High-resource language pairs.Src↓Trg→ en fr hi id vi
enBLOOM – 45.0 27.2 39.0 28.5
M2M – 42.0 28.1 37.3 35.1
frBLOOM 45.6 – 18.5 31.4 32.8
M2M 37.2 – 22.9 29.1 30.3
hiBLOOM 35.1 27.6 – – –
M2M 27.9 25.9 – – –
idBLOOM 43.2 30.4 – – –
M2M 33.7 30.8 – – –
viBLOOM 38.7 26.8 – – –
M2M 29.5 25.8 – – –
(d) High →mid-resource language pairs.
Table 8: 1-shot MT results (spBLEU) on the Flores-101 devtest set.
4.3.3 Flores
Inthe1-shotsetting,wetestseverallanguagedirectionsintheFlores-101(Goyaletal.,2022)
devtest set using the “xglm-source+target” prompt (Lin et al., 2021). The 1-shot example
is randomly taken from the dev set. We separate out results for low-resource language
pairs (Table 8a), between related languages of the Romance language family (Table 8b),
high-resource language pairs (Table 8c) and high-to-mid-resource language pairs (Table 8d).
33. The truncation rule is specific to the “xglm-source+target” prompt and the fact that overgeneration
consists of repeating the prompt pattern. Anything after a first newline or the regular expression pattern
= .+?:is discarded.
31BigScience Workshop
Languagesareclassifiedaslow-, mid-andhigh-resourcedependingontheirrepresentationin
ROOTS. We compare to supervised results from the M2M-100 model (Fan et al., 2021) with
615M parameters, for which scores are computed by Goyal et al. (2022). Additionally, we
compare to 32-shot AlexaTM results for high-resource language pairs (Soltan et al., 2022).
Results are good across the board for both translation between high-resource languages and
fromhigh-tomid-resourcelanguages,suggestingBLOOM’sgoodmultilingualcapacity,even
across scripts (here between Latin (or extended Latin), Chinese, Arabic and Devanagari
scripts). Compared to the supervised M2M-100 model, results are often comparable and
sometimes better in this 1-shot setting, and results are comparable in many cases to those
of AlexaTM (even though AlexTM results are for 32-shot).
The translation quality for many of the low-resource languages is good, comparable
to or even slightly better than the supervised M2M model. However, results are very
poor between Swahili and Yoruba, languages that are present but under-represented in
BLOOM’s training data ( <50k tokens each). This contrasts with the results for translation
between Romance (and therefore related) languages, where results are good across-the-
board, including for translation from Galician (glg), a language not included in the training
data, but which shares many similarities with the other Romance languages, in particular
with Portuguese (por). This however does question BLOOM’s quality on those under-
represented low-resource languages included in training.
4.4 Summarization
Figure 9 shows one-shot results for BLOOM models alongside OPT-175B for comparison.
Each point represents a per-prompt score. The key takeaways are that BLOOM attains
higher performance on multilingual summarization than OPT and that performance in-
creases as the parameter count of the model increases. We suspect this is due to BLOOM’s
multilingual-focused training.
AsdiscussedinSection4.1,wereportROUGE-2scoresforthesakeofcomparabilitywith
prior work, and because there is a lack of alternatives for generation evaluation. However,
we qualitatively observe that in many cases, the ROUGE-2 score understates the quality of
the summaries generated by the systems.
4.5 Code Generation
The BLOOM pretraining corpus, ROOTS, consists of around 11% of code. In Table 9,
we report benchmarking results of BLOOM on HumanEval (Chen et al., 2021). We find
the performance of pretrained BLOOM models to be similar to that of the similar-sized
GPT models trained on the Pile (Gao et al., 2020). The Pile contains English data and
around 13% of code (GitHub + StackExchange), which is similar to the code data sources
and proportions in ROOTS. The Codex models, which have solely been finetuned on code,
are significantly stronger than other models. Multitask finetuned BLOOMZ models do not
improve significantly over BLOOM models. We hypothesize this is due to the finetuning
dataset, xP3, not containing significant amounts of pure code completion. Rather, xP3
contains code-related tasks, such as estimating the time complexity of a given Python code
snippet. Additional analysis is provided in Muennighoff et al. (2022b).
32BLOOM
0510
0510
0510
0510
0510
0510
0510
051015
0510
BLOOM-560M
 BLOOM-1.1B
 BLOOM-3B
 BLOOM-7.1B
 BLOOM
 OPT-175B
vi → vi hi → hi fr → fr en → en
es → es ar → ar pt → pt zh → zh id → idW ikiLingua
Figure 9: WikiLingua One-shot Results. Each plot represents a different language with
per-prompt ROUGE-2 F-measure scores.
4.6 HELM benchmark
For completeness, we reproduce here evaluations from the HELM benchmark (Liang et al.,
2022), which ran 5-shot evaluations of a variety of language models on English-only tasks.
Despite the multilingual training, BLOOM is roughly on par in accuracy with previous-
generation English-only models, such as GPT3-davinci v1 and J1-Grande v1, but be-
hind more recent monolingual models such as InstructGPT davinci v2, Turing NLG v2,
Anthropic-LM v4-s3, or OPT. Like other large language models of this size, it is not very
well calibrated, but quite robust. Finally, on this benchmark, it is one of the best models
for fairness, slightly more toxic than average in English, and average for bias.
4.7 Multitask Finetuning
Building on recent work on multitask finetuning (Sanh et al., 2022; Wei et al., 2021; Wang
et al., 2022a) we explore using multilingual multitask finetuning to improve the zero-shot
performance of the BLOOM model. We conducted multilingual multitask finetuning of
BLOOM models using the xP3 corpus outlined in Section 3.1.4. We find that zero-shot
performance significantly increases. In Figure 11, we compare the zero-shot performance
of pretrained BLOOM and XGLM models with multitask finetuned BLOOMZ, T0 and
mTk-Instruct (Wang et al., 2022b). BLOOM and XGLM performances are near the ran-
dom baselines of 33% for NLI (XNLI) and 50% for coreference resolution (XWinograd) and
33BigScience Workshop
pass@ k
k= 1 k= 10 k= 100
GPT-Neo 1.3B 4.79% 7.47% 16.30%
GPT-Neo 2.7B 6.41% 11.27% 21.37%
GPT-J 6B 11.62% 15.74% 27.74%
GPT-NeoX 20B 15.4% 25.6% 41.2%
Codex-300M 13.17% 20.37% 36.27%
Codex-679M 16.22% 25.7% 40.95%
Codex-2.5B 21.36% 35.42% 59.5%
Codex-12B 28.81% 46.81% 72.31%
BLOOM-560M 0.82% 3.02% 5.91%
BLOOM-1.1B 2.48% 5.93% 9.62%
BLOOM-1.7B 4.03% 7.45% 12.75%
BLOOM-3B 6.48% 11.35% 20.43%
BLOOM-7.1B 7.73% 17.38% 29.47%
BLOOM 15.52% 32.20% 55.45%
BLOOMZ-560M 2.18 % 4.11% 9.00%
BLOOMZ-1.1B 2.63% 6.22% 11.68%
BLOOMZ-1.7B 4.38% 8.73% 16.09%
BLOOMZ-3B 6.29% 11.94% 19.06%
BLOOMZ-7.1B 8.06% 15.03% 27.49%
BLOOMZ 12.06% 26.53% 48.44%
Table 9: Performance on HumanEval (Chen et al., 2021). Non-BLOOM results come from
prior work (Chen et al., 2021; Fried et al., 2022). The Codex model is a language model
that was finetuned on code, while the GPT models (Black et al.; Wang and Komatsuzaki,
2021; Black et al., 2022) are trained on a mix of code and text like BLOOM.
sentence completion (XCOPA and XStoryCloze). After going through multilingual multi-
task finetuning (BLOOMZ), zero-shot performance significantly improves on the depicted
held-out tasks. Despite also being multitask finetuned, T0 performs badly on the multi-
lingual datasets shown due to it being a monolingual English model. Additional results
provided in Muennighoff et al. (2022b), however, show that models finetuned on xP3 also
outperform T0 on English datasets when controlling for size and architecture. This is likely
due to T0’s finetuning dataset (P3) containing less diverse datasets and prompts than xP3.
Multitask finetuning performance has been shown to correlate with the amount of datasets
and prompts (Chung et al., 2022).
4.8 Embeddings
In Section 3.5, we have outlined the contrastive finetuning procedure for creating SGPT-
BLOOM text embedding models. In Table 10, we report benchmarking results on two
34BLOOM
0.0 0.5 1.0Cohere small v20220720 (410M)InstructGPT ada v1 (350M*)GPT-3 ada v1 (350M)GPT-3 babbage v1 (1.3B)YaLM (100B)T5 (11B)T0pp (11B)UL2 (20B)InstructGPT babbage v1 (1.3B*)Cohere medium v20220720 (6.1B)GPT-J (6B)GPT-3 curie v1 (6.7B)TNLG v2 (6.7B)InstructGPT curie v1 (6.7B*)J1-Large v1 (7.5B)GPT-NeoX (20B)Cohere large v20220720 (13.1B)J1-Grande v1 (17B)BLOOM (176B)OPT (66B)GLM (130B)GPT-3 davinci v1 (175B)J1-Jumbo v1 (178B)Cohere xlarge v20220609 (52.4B)OPT (175B)Anthropic-LM v4-s3 (52B)TNLG v2 (530B)InstructGPT davinci v2 (175B*)Accuracy 
0.0 0.5 1.0T0pp (11B)GLM (130B)Cohere large v20220720 (13.1B)TNLG v2 (6.7B)TNLG v2 (530B)GPT-3 davinci v1 (175B)GPT-3 ada v1 (350M)GPT-3 curie v1 (6.7B)Cohere xlarge v20220609 (52.4B)Cohere medium v20220720 (6.1B)GPT-3 babbage v1 (1.3B)Cohere small v20220720 (410M)T5 (11B)UL2 (20B)GPT-J (6B)InstructGPT davinci v2 (175B*)GPT-NeoX (20B)YaLM (100B)OPT (175B)BLOOM (176B)InstructGPT curie v1 (6.7B*)InstructGPT babbage v1 (1.3B*)OPT (66B)InstructGPT ada v1 (350M*)Calibration error 
0.0 0.5 1.0GPT-3 ada v1 (350M)InstructGPT ada v1 (350M*)Cohere small v20220720 (410M)GPT-3 babbage v1 (1.3B)YaLM (100B)T5 (11B)InstructGPT babbage v1 (1.3B*)T0pp (11B)Cohere medium v20220720 (6.1B)TNLG v2 (6.7B)GPT-J (6B)GPT-3 curie v1 (6.7B)UL2 (20B)InstructGPT curie v1 (6.7B*)Cohere large v20220720 (13.1B)J1-Large v1 (7.5B)GPT-NeoX (20B)J1-Grande v1 (17B)OPT (66B)GPT-3 davinci v1 (175B)J1-Jumbo v1 (178B)Cohere xlarge v20220609 (52.4B)OPT (175B)BLOOM (176B)TNLG v2 (530B)GLM (130B)Anthropic-LM v4-s3 (52B)InstructGPT davinci v2 (175B*)Robustness 
0.0 0.5 1.0InstructGPT ada v1 (350M*)Cohere small v20220720 (410M)GPT-3 ada v1 (350M)YaLM (100B)GPT-3 babbage v1 (1.3B)T5 (11B)T0pp (11B)UL2 (20B)InstructGPT babbage v1 (1.3B*)Cohere medium v20220720 (6.1B)GPT-3 curie v1 (6.7B)GPT-J (6B)TNLG v2 (6.7B)InstructGPT curie v1 (6.7B*)J1-Large v1 (7.5B)GPT-NeoX (20B)Cohere large v20220720 (13.1B)J1-Grande v1 (17B)GLM (130B)GPT-3 davinci v1 (175B)J1-Jumbo v1 (178B)OPT (66B)Cohere xlarge v20220609 (52.4B)BLOOM (176B)OPT (175B)Anthropic-LM v4-s3 (52B)TNLG v2 (530B)InstructGPT davinci v2 (175B*)Fairness 
0.0 0.5 1.0J1-Jumbo v1 (178B)OPT (66B)T0pp (11B)OPT (175B)J1-Large v1 (7.5B)InstructGPT babbage v1 (1.3B*)TNLG v2 (530B)Cohere xlarge v20220609 (52.4B)InstructGPT davinci v2 (175B*)Anthropic-LM v4-s3 (52B)UL2 (20B)BLOOM (176B)J1-Grande v1 (17B)GPT-3 ada v1 (350M)Cohere large v20220720 (13.1B)Cohere small v20220720 (410M)GLM (130B)Cohere medium v20220720 (6.1B)T5 (11B)GPT-NeoX (20B)GPT-3 babbage v1 (1.3B)TNLG v2 (6.7B)GPT-3 curie v1 (6.7B)InstructGPT curie v1 (6.7B*)GPT-3 davinci v1 (175B)YaLM (100B)InstructGPT ada v1 (350M*)GPT-J (6B)Bias 
0.0 0.5 1.0InstructGPT ada v1 (350M*)J1-Jumbo v1 (178B)InstructGPT curie v1 (6.7B*)InstructGPT babbage v1 (1.3B*)TNLG v2 (6.7B)GPT-3 babbage v1 (1.3B)GPT-3 davinci v1 (175B)OPT (66B)TNLG v2 (530B)GLM (130B)InstructGPT davinci v2 (175B*)T5 (11B)GPT-3 ada v1 (350M)OPT (175B)GPT-3 curie v1 (6.7B)Cohere medium v20220720 (6.1B)Cohere xlarge v20220609 (52.4B)UL2 (20B)GPT-NeoX (20B)Anthropic-LM v4-s3 (52B)BLOOM (176B)J1-Grande v1 (17B)YaLM (100B)Cohere large v20220720 (13.1B)Cohere small v20220720 (410M)J1-Large v1 (7.5B)GPT-J (6B)T0pp (11B)T oxicity 
Figure 10: Results for a wide variety of language models on the 5-shot HELM benchmark.
Taken from Liang et al. (2022)
multilingual datasets from the Massive Text Embedding Benchmark (MTEB, Muennighoff
et al., 2022a). We find that SGPT-BLOOM-7.1B-msmarco36provides state-of-the-art per-
formance on several classification and semantic textual similarity splits. However, with 7.1
billion parameters it is an order of magnitude larger than models like the displayed mul-
tilingual MiniLM37and MPNet38. SGPT-BLOOM-1.7B-nli39performs significantly worse,
likely due to less parameters and its finetuning being shorter (NLI is a much smaller dataset
than MS-MARCO). Apart from the BLOOM models, ST5-XL40is the largest model with
1.2 billion parameters. However, as an English-only model its performance on non-English
36.hf.co/bigscience/sgpt-bloom-7b1-msmarco
37.hf.co/sentence-transformers/paraphrase-multilingual-MiniLM-L12-v2
38.hf.co/sentence-transformers/paraphrase-multilingual-mpnet-base-v2
39.hf.co/bigscience/sgpt-bloom-1b7-nli
40.hf.co/sentence-transformers/sentence-t5-xl
35BigScience Workshop
20304050607080
20304050607080
20304050607080
20304050607080
20304050607080
20304050607080
20304050607080
20304050607080
405060708090
405060708090
405060708090
406080100
406080100
406080100
406080100
406080100
406080100
406080100
406080100
406080100
406080100
406080100
406080100
406080100
XGLM-7.5B BLOOM mTk-13B T0-1 1B BLOOMZ-7.1B BLOOMZXNLI AR XNLI ES XNLI FR XNLI HI XNLI VI XNLI UR
XNLI SW XNLI ZH XWinograd FR XWinograd PT XWinograd ZH XCOP A ID
XCOP A SW XCOP A TA XCOP A VI XCOP A ZH XStoryCloze AR XStoryCloze ES
XStoryCloze EU XStoryCloze HI XStoryCloze ID XStoryCloze SW XStoryCloze TE XStoryCloze ZHNatural Language Infer ence
Coreference Resolution
Sentence Completion
Figure 11: BLOOMZ zero-shot task generalization. Five untuned prompts are evaluated for
each dataset and plotted. T0 is monolingual (English) while other models are multilingual.
T0 performance may be hurt by its inability to tokenize some non-English texts.
languages is poor. The languages displayed are part of the BLOOM pretraining corpus.
Performance on more languages and datasets can be inspected on the MTEB leaderboard41.
4.9 Multilingual Probing
Probing has emerged as a significant evaluation paradigm to analyze and interpret the inner
workings of LLMs (Ettinger et al., 2016; Adi et al., 2017; Belinkov et al., 2017; Hupkes et al.,
41.hf.co/spaces/mteb/leaderboard
36BLOOM
ST5-XL LASER2 MiniLM-L1234MPNet35LaBSE SGPT-BLOOM-1.7B SGPT-BLOOM-7.1B
Embedding classification performance on MASSIVE (FitzGerald et al., 2022) scored using accuracy
Arabic (ar) 4.18 37.16 51.43 45.14 50.86 54.59 59.25
Bengali (bn) 2.60 42.51 48.79 35.34 58.22 57.76 61.59
English (en) 72.09 47.91 69.32 66.84 61.46 66.69 69.67
Spanish (es) 57.97 45.44 64.43 59.66 58.32 61.77 66.35
French (fr) 60.99 46.13 64.82 60.25 60.47 64.58 66.95
Hindi (hi) 3.02 40.20 62.77 58.37 59.40 60.74 63.54
Indonesian (id) 41.53 45.81 65.43 59.85 61.12 60.07 64.06
Kannada (kn) 2.79 4.32 50.63 40.98 56.24 48.56 53.54
Malayalam (ml) 2.98 41.33 54.34 42.41 57.91 55.10 58.27
Portuguese (pt) 57.95 48.55 64.89 61.27 60.16 62.52 66.69
Swahili (sw) 30.60 31.89 31.95 29.57 51.62 43.90 49.81
Tamil (ta) 1.79 29.63 50.17 36.77 55.04 52.66 56.40
Telugu (te) 2.26 36.03 52.82 40.72 58.32 49.32 54.71
Urdu (ur) 2.70 26.11 56.37 52.80 56.70 51.00 56.75
Vietnamese (vi) 21.47 44.33 59.68 56.61 56.67 59.85 64.53
Semantic textual similarity on STS22 (Madabushi et al., 2022) scored using spearman correlation of cosine similarities
Arabic (ar) 29.60 42.57 52.19 46.20 57.67 48.64 58.67
English (en) 64.32 39.76 63.06 61.72 60.97 61.45 66.13
Spanish (es) 58.16 54.92 59.91 56.56 63.18 61.81 65.41
French (fr) 77.49 58.61 74.30 70.55 77.95 73.18 80.38
Chinese (zh) 33.55 49.41 61.75 58.75 63.02 58.53 66.78
Table 10: Performance of BLOOM models finetuned for sentence embeddings on classifica-
tion and STS datasets from MTEB (Muennighoff et al., 2022b).
2018; Tenney et al., 2018; Belinkov and Glass, 2019; Teehan et al., 2022), although it comes
with certain shortcomings (Belinkov, 2022). Examination of the LLM embeddings can help
shed light on the generalizing abilities of the model apart from its training objective loss or
downstream task evaluation, which is especially beneficial for examining languages lacking
annotated datasets or benchmarks.
4.9.1 Method
ForinterpretingBLOOM’smultilingualgeneralizingabilities, weutilizethe“UniversalProb-
ing” framework42for systematic probing analysis in 104languages and 80morphosyntactic
features (Serikov et al., 2022). The framework provides SentEval-style (Conneau et al.,
2018) probing setup and datasets for each language available in Universal Dependencies
(UD; Nivre et al., 2016). We consider the following 17languages from 7language families
present in BLOOM’s pretraining corpus (Section 3.1) and UD treebanks: Arabic (Afro-
Asiatic), Bambara (Mande), Basque (language isolate), Bengali, Catalan, English, French,
Hindi, Marathi, Portuguese, Spanish, Urdu (Indo-European), Chinese (Sino-Tibetan), In-
donesian (Austronesian), Tamil (Dravidian), Wolof, Yoruba (Niger-Congo). Our setup
covers 38morphosyntactic features in total, which represent language-specific linguistic
information. We provide a dataset sample in Table 11.
The probing procedure is conducted as follows. First, we compute <s>-pooled rep-
resentations of the input sentence at each layer of the 1.7B-parameter BLOOM variant
42.github.com/bigscience-workshop/massive-probing-framework
37BigScience Workshop
Language Label Sentence
English Sing The scheme makes money through sponsorship and advertising .
Plur Still , there are questions left unanswered .
Spanish Sing Eligi ono ir tras un tercer período en el siguiente ciclo de elecciones .
Plur Todavía quedan preguntas sin responder .
Table 11: Examples of the Number task in English and Spanish. The subject number
indicator is highlighted in bold. The task is to predict if the sentence includes a singular
subject number (upper sentence) and a plural subject number (bottom sentence).
(“BLOOM 1B7”) and BLOOM (with 176B parameters). Second, we train a binary logis-
tic regression classifier to predict a presence of a morphosyntactic feature in the sentence.
Logistic regression is chosen due to its higher selectivity as opposed to non-linear probing
classifiers (Hewitt and Liang, 2019). We use the original UD training, validation, and test
splits here. Third, the probing performance is evaluated by F1weighted score due to target
class imbalance for most probing tasks. The results are averaged across three runs with
different random seeds.
Baselines We compare the probing performance with random guessing and logistic re-
gression classifiers trained on the following TF-IDF features (Salton and Yang, 1973): word
unigrams, character N-grams, BPE43token N-grams, and SentencePiece44(SP; Kudo and
Richardson, 2018) token N-grams. We use the N-gram range ∈[1; 4]and limit the TF-IDF
vocabularies to top- 250k features.
Correlation We run statistical tests to analyze correlations between the probing perfor-
mance and linguistic, dataset, and model configuration criteria:
•Language script: the results are divided into two groups by the language script –
Latin and others (Devanagari, Tamil, and Arabic). Here, we use the non-parametric
test Mann-Whitney U (Mann and Whitney, 1947).
•Language family: the results are divided into 7groups by the language family. We
apply the ANOVA to analyze the variance between the groups.
•Probing and pretraining dataset size: we run the Pearson correlation coefficient test
(Pearson, 1895) to compute correlation between the probing performance and these
data configuration criteria.
•Effect of the model size: the results are divided into two groups by the BLOOM
version. Here, we use the Mann-Whitney U test to see if there is a correlation between
the number of parameters and the probing results.
38BLOOM
BLOOM-1B7 BLOOM Random TF-IDF (Char) TF-IDF (Word) TF-IDF (BPE) TF-IDF (SP)
Arabic 0.66 ±0.27 0.64 ±0.27 0.49 ±0.013 0.41 ±0.44 0.4±0.44 0.41 ±0.44 0.41 ±0.44
Bambara 0.64 ±0.16 0.59 ±0.16 0.45 ±0.1 0.52 ±0.46 0.45 ±0.47 0.48 ±0.49 0.49 ±0.49
Basque 0.68 ±0.19 0.62 ±0.19 0.49 ±0.03 0.41 ±0.43 0.44 ±0.46 0.48 ±0.44 0.41 ±0.46
Bengali 0.42 ±0.15 0.45 ±0.12 0.35 ±0.23 0.63 ±0.48 0.37 ±0.44 0.41 ±0.32 0.76 ±0.28
Catalan 0.65 ±0.25 0.61 ±0.26 0.34 ±0.01 0.24 ±0.38 0.24 ±0.39 0.24 ±0.39 0.24 ±0.39
Chinese 0.66 ±0.25 0.50 ±0.21 0.55 ±0.03 0.03 ±0.05 0.11 ±0.28 0.04 ±0.06 0.03 ±0.05
English 0.57 ±0.24 0.57 ±0.24 0.43 ±0.03 0.45 ±0.43 0.46 ±0.43 0.45 ±0.43 0.44 ±0.44
French 0.61 ±0.23 0.57 ±0.22 0.44 ±0.02 0.32 ±0.43 0.32 ±0.43 0.32 ±0.43 0.33 ±0.44
Hindi 0.63 ±0.23 0.6±0.25 0.48 ±0.03 0.53 ±0.46 0.55 ±0.47 0.53 ±0.46 0.53 ±0.46
Indonesian 0.65 ±0.27 0.6±0.27 0.48 ±0.05 0.41 ±0.46 0.43 ±0.45 0.41 ±0.46 0.45 ±0.45
Marathi 0.57 ±0.25 0.48 ±0.24 0.32 ±0.09 0.44 ±0.47 0.46 ±0.46 0.44 ±0.47 0.44 ±0.47
Portugese 0.67 ±0.23 0.63 ±0.26 0.4±0.03 0.48 ±0.48 0.49 ±0.48 0.48 ±0.48 0.48 ±0.48
Spanish 0.66 ±0.24 0.65 ±0.24 0.42 ±0.02 0.35 ±0.42 0.35 ±0.44 0.36 ±0.44 0.36 ±0.43
Tamil 0.57 ±0.25 0.51 ±0.27 0.43 ±0.05 0.51 ±0.44 0.53 ±0.44 0.5±0.44 0.5±0.44
Urdu 0.75 ±0.21 0.70 ±0.24 0.43 ±0.02 0.39 ±0.48 0.39 ±0.47 0.39 ±0.48 0.39 ±0.48
Wolof 0.51 ±0.32 0.47 ±0.32 0.41 ±0.02 0.26 ±0.39 0.25 ±0.39 0.3±0.43 0.27 ±0.39
Yoruba 0.48 ±0.07 0.36 ±0.07 0.43 ±0.06 0.33 ±0.45 0.09 ±0.05 0.16 ±0.11 0.09 ±0.05
Table 12: Probing performance ( F1averaged by layers) of the BLOOM-based classifiers and
count-based baselines. The results are averaged over probing tasks, and three experiment
runs within each language. Standard deviation is determined by the results along the
language tasks.
Arabic
Bambara
Basque
Bengali
Catalan
Chinese
English
French
Hindi
Indonesian
Marathi
Portuguese
Spanish
T amil
Urdu
Wolof
Yoruba
LanguageAspect
Case
Definite
Gender
Mood
NumType
Number
Number[psor]
Person
PronType
T ense
VerbForm
VoiceT ask category
0.10.20.30.40.50.60.70.80.9
(a) BLOOM-1B7
Arabic
Bambara
Basque
Bengali
Catalan
Chinese
English
French
Hindi
Indonesian
Marathi
Portuguese
Spanish
T amil
Urdu
Wolof
Yoruba
LanguageAspect
Case
Definite
Gender
Mood
NumType
Number
Number[psor]
Person
PronType
T ense
VerbForm
VoiceT ask category
0.20.40.60.8 (b) BLOOM
Figure 12: Probing classifiers’ results by language and task category. White squares denote
that the morphosyntactic category is not represented in the language.
4.9.2 Results
Probing Table 12 presents the results of probing experiments averaged over the probing
tasks and experiment runs within each language. The overall pattern is that BLOOM-
1B7 performs on par or better than BLOOM, and both LLMs outperform the count-based
baselines. In particular, the LLMs achieve more robust performance on Arabic, Basque, and
Indo-European languages (e.g., Catalan, French, Hindi, Portuguese, Spanish, and Urdu),
43. BertTokenizer: hf.co/bert-base-multilingual-cased
44. XLMRobertaTokenizer: hf.co/xlm-roberta-base
39BigScience Workshop
Criterion Model Test p-value
Language scriptBLOOM
BLOOM-1B7 Mann-Whitney U0.72
0.13
Language familyBLOOM
BLOOM-1B7 ANOVA<0.01
<0.01
Probing dataset sizeBLOOM
BLOOM-1B7 Pearson0.63
0.02
Pretraining dataset sizeBLOOM
BLOOM-1B7 Pearson0.46
<0.01
Difference between versions BLOOM & BLOOM-1B7 Mann-Whitney U <0.01
Table 13: Results of statistical tests and correlation analysis between probing performance
and linguistic, dataset, and model configuration criteria.
while Bengali, Wolof, and Yoruba receive the lowest scores. We attribute this behavior
to the transfer abilities: BLOOM infers linguistic properties better for the closely related
languages that comprise a significant amount of data. For example, the performance on any
Romance language is better than in English, and the results in Indic languages are close to
those in high-resource languages.
Figure 12 presents the language-wise probing performance results for morphosyntactic
features represented at least in 5languages. The probing performance of both LLMs is
similar despite the difference in size. We find that the LLMs infer Mood and Person well
with no regard for language. Number, NumType (numeral type), and Voice are moderately
inferred in most languages. The models generally show worse qualities in the other cate-
gories, indicating that they do not encode such morphological information. The possible
explanation of such difference in performance may be the diversity of possible values of
these categories. For example, Mood and Person share similar values across the presented
languages, while the set of Case values is highly dependent on the language.
Correlation The correlation analysis results support conclusions on the probing perfor-
mance and reveals contributing factors (see Table 13). Both models show similar results on
the languages with different language scripts. Results of BLOOM-1B7 are highly correlated
with language family, probing dataset size, and pretraining dataset size. According to the
results of Mann-Whithey U test, BLOOM-1B7 shows significantly better results ( p <0.01)
than BLOOM. However, BLOOM shows more stable performance on different languages in
spite of the amount of data it has seen during pretraining. This might indicate the better
generalization abilities of the model with more parameters.
Discussion It should be noted that the following questions remain for further research:
1.Generalizing abilities. BLOOM-1B7 is leading in the average performance of mor-
phosyntactic feature classification for the languages in Table 12. The BLOOM results
are lower, which can be interpreted as a worse grammatical generalization over the
aforecited languages. However, the BLOOM-1B7’s probing correlation results with
40BLOOM
factors like pretraining dataset size are more prominent, which makes it potentially
less generalizing on the under-resourced languages than the bigger version.
2.Multilingual abilities. A separate research interest implies considering languages
that are not explicitly included in the pretraining corpus of the models. Expand-
ing the set of languages for probing will allow for a typological interpretation and a
deeper analysis of the most learnable and hard-to-learn linguistic features on a more
considerable scope.
3.Under-resourced language evaluation. The under-resourced languages of the
Indic and Niger-Congo families included in the pretraining corpus in smaller shares
represent a separate subject for future probing. We also plan to investigate the results
of high-resourced and under-resourced languages to reveal possible linguistic insights
in these two groups.
4.Different layers and training dynamics. The analysis has focused on averaged
representations of all layers and at the end of training. Analyzing different layers may
reveal how morpho-syntactic representations are built during processing. Similarly,
investigating how properties are acquired over the course of pre-training (Choshen
et al., 2022; Zhang et al., 2021; Voloshina et al., 2022) is a viable direction for research.
4.10 Bias
As a preliminary study into the biases learned by BLOOM, we present evaluation on the
multilingual CrowS-Pairs dataset, which combines a revised version of the CrowS-Pairs
dataset developed by Nangia et al. (2020) together with the French version of CrowS-Pairs
introduced by Névéol et al. (2022). One challenge of this evaluation was to adapt a dataset
originally intended for masked language models to autoregressive language models such as
BLOOM. CrowS-Pairs relies on minimal pairs to compare a stereotyped statement and a
non-stereotyped statement (e.g. “ Womencan’t drive.” is a gender stereotype while “ Men
can’t drive” is not). The two statements differ only by the social category targeted by
the stereotype and that social category is present in the stereotyped statement and not
in the non-stereotyped statement. The evaluation aims at assessing systematic preference
of models for stereotyped statements. The original “metric score” compared pseudo-log-
likelihood of sentences in a pair to determine which sentence received a higher score from a
masked language model. Prompts were designed to require the model to select one of the
statements based on the “likely” and “realistic” nature of the situations described.
Figure 13 shows that BLOOM’s overall prompt accuracy was close to .50, which suggests
an overall absence of bias. We note that the scores in English and French are very close,
suggesting similar overall behavior of the model on both languages. We also show results
on mono-lingual autoregressive models — GPT-Neo (Black et al.) and GPT-FR (Simoulin
and Crabbé, 2021) for English and French, respectively.
Table 14 presents the results per bias type in the CrowS-Pairs dataset. The results are
quite homogeneous over the categories, which contrasts with previous studies on masked
language models, which suggested models were prone to bias in specific categories, which
differed between models tested. Nonetheless, accuracy significantly differs from 50 (T-test,
41BigScience Workshop
BLOOM BLOOM-1.1B BLOOM-560M GPT-NEO-1.3B GPT-NEO-125M0.480.490.500.510.52English
BLOOM BLOOM-1.1B BLOOM-560M GPT-FR-1B GPT-FR-124M0.480.490.500.510.52French
Figure13: OverallaccuracyofBLOOMon crowS-Pairs perpromptforEnglishandFrench.
Results on the two smallest BLOOM models and monolingual GPT models of comparable
size are also shown.
Bias type support English French
ethnicity color 460 50.05 50.48*
gender 321 51.17* 51.24*
socioeconomic status 196 51.05* 52.22*
nationality 253 49.25* 48.49*
religion 115 53.82* 53.01*
age 90 49.35 50.13
sexual orientation 91 50.00 49.9
physical appearance 72 48.20 49.67
disability 66 48.49* 49.16*
other 13 50.18 42.1*
All 1,677 49.78* 50.61*
Table 14: BLOOM accuracy results on crowS-Pairs bias categories averaged over eight
runs for English and French. Significance for the one sample T-test ( p < . 05) is indicated
with *.
p < .05) overall for both languages, as well as for a number of bias categories, as shown per
asterisks in the table.
Limitations Blodgett et al. (2021) discuss validity issues with the original CrowS-Pairs
corpus. The CrowS-Pairs version used here differs from the original by addressing some of
the issues pointed out by Blodgett et al. (2021) and by constructing 200additional sentence
pairs based on stereotypes collected from French speakers. In a recent evaluation of bias in
masked language models in English and French, results obtained on the revised dataset were
not significantly different from those obtained on the original dataset Névéol et al. (2022).
42BLOOM
However, its original validation does not naturally apply here, and comparison to other
CrowS-Pairs results is more difficult. For a stronger assessment of bias, results obtained
with CrowS-Pairs should be compared with other measures of bias, and also assessed for
all languages in the model. However, as noted by Talat et al. (2022), very little material
(corpora, measures) is available for multilingual bias assessment.
Although our examinations suggest a limited presence of bias in the model, they cannot
cover the breadth of possible usage scenarios. One such scenario where models may have a
larger impact is on linguistic diversity and language variation encountered. As the training
resources for BLOOM are carefully curated, they may also capture some language variations
to a larger degree than other models. This also impacts the ability of trained models to
equitably represent different variations. Such differences can aid in the propagation and
legitimization of some language variants over others. Our evaluation of biases in the model
are further limited to the situations, languages and language variants that are covered by
multilingual CrowS-Pairs . We therefore expect a distinction between our findings using
CrowS-Pairs and wider model use (for a more detailed exploration on such differences, see
Raji et al., 2021).
5. Conclusion
In this work, we present BLOOM, a 176B-parameter open-access multilingual language
model. BLOOM was created by BigScience, a collaboration of hundreds of researchers, and
was trained on the French government-funded Jean Zay supercomputer for 3.5 months. In
this paper, we chronicled the development of BLOOM, from the creation of its training
dataset ROOTS to the design of its architecture and tokenizer. We also discuss evaluation
results of BLOOM and other large language models, finding it has competitive performance
that improves after multitask finetuning.
We hope that the release of a powerful multilingual language model unlocks new applica-
tions and research directions for large language models. Further, we hope that documenting
our experience will help the machine learning research community organize new large-scale
collaborative projects similar to BigScience. Besides enabling results that are impossible
for any individual research group to achieve, this form of organization will also allow more
people with different backgrounds to share their ideas and participate in the development
of major advances in the field.
6. Contributions
Authors are assigned to each authorship category according to which aspects of the project
they contributed to. Many authors appear under multiple categories because they con-
tributed to the project in more than one way. Author order in all categories is alphabetical
by first name, except for “Major Contributors” where authors are shuffled randomly apart
from Teven Le Scao, who is intentionally listed first and “Organization” where Thomas
Wolf is intentionally listed last. A description of each category follows. For finer-grained
contribution details, please see the papers mentioned under each category.
Major Contributors lists individuals without whom BLOOM would not have happened
and/or who spent more than 20% of their time on the BigScience effort as a whole.
43BigScience Workshop
Dataset lists individuals who contributed to data sourcing, organization, and processing
efforts, includingtheauthorsofLauren¸ conetal.(2022), McMillan-Majoretal.(2022),
and Jernite et al. (2022).
Tokenization lists individuals who built the BLOOM tokenizer and authors of Mielke
et al. (2021).
Prompt Engineering lists individuals who wrote, edited, and reviewed prompt templates
for the datasets we consider as well as authors of Sanh et al. (2022), Bach et al. (2022),
and Muennighoff et al. (2022b).
Architecture and Objective lists individuals who ran experiments to help determine
BLOOM’s model architecture and training objective, including authors of Wang et al.
(2022a) and Le Scao et al. (2022).
Engineering lists individuals who contributed to code and infrastructure to train BLOOM
on the Jean Zay supercomputer.
Evaluation and interpretability listsindividualswhohelpedevaluatetheBLOOMmodel
as well as authors of Talat et al. (2022).
Broader Impacts lists authors of the ethical charter, license, and model card, in addi-
tion to individuals who studied privacy issues, social impacts, and BLOOM’s carbon
footprint.
Applications lists members of working groups focused on applications of BLOOM, includ-
ing authors of Fries et al. (2022b), Fries et al. (2022a), and De Toni et al. (2022).
Organization lists individuals who coordinated the BigScience effort and authors of Akiki
et al. (2022).
Acknowledgments
The BigScience Workshop was granted access to the HPC resources of the Institut du
développement et des ressources en informatique scientifique (IDRIS) du Centre national
de la recherche scientifique (CNRS) under the allocation 2021-A0101012475 made by the
Grand équipement national de calcul intensif (GENCI). Model training ran on the Jean-
Zay supercomputer of GENCI at IDRIS, and we thank the IDRIS team for their responsive
support throughout the project, in particular Rémi Lacroix.
Roman Castagné, Thomas Wang, Benoˆ ıt Sagot and Rachel Bawden’s contributions were
funded by Benoˆ ıt Sagot’s and Rachel Bawden’s chairs in the PRAIRIE institute funded by
the French national agency ANR as part of the “Investissements d’avenir” programme under
the reference ANR-19-P3IA-0001. Aurélie Névéol’s contribution was supported by ANR
under grant GEM ANR-19-CE38-0012. Oskar van der Wal’s contributions were financed by
the Dutch Research Council (NWO) as part of Open Competition Digitalisation-SSH with
project number 406.DI.19.059.
44BLOOM
The BigScience Workshop would also like to acknowledge the support and financing
of the following organizations, organization members and affiliations of some of the par-
ticipants: ESPCI and LAMSADE (Dauphine Université, PSL, CNRS) for Alexandre Al-
lauzen; MELODI team at IRIT/University of Toulouse for Farah Benamara, Chloé Braud,
PhilippeMuller, andVéroniqueMoriceau; IRISALinkMediateamIMATAG/CNRSforVin-
cent Claveau and Antoine Chaffin; Université de Lorraine ATILF UMR 7118 CNRS / UL
for Mathieu Constant; University of Paris for Benoˆ ıt Crabbé, Marie Candito and Antoine
Simoulin; GdR TAL (CNRS) for Béatrice Daille; CNRS DR1 INSERM UMR1093 UBFC
Dijon for Peter Ford Dominey; Aix-Marseille University UTLN CNRS LIS/UMR7220 for
Benoˆ ıt Favre and Frédéric Béchet; CEA LASTI for Bertrand Delezoide, Olivier Ferret,
Adrian Popescu and Julien Tourille; Sorbonne Université LORIA for Karen Fort; CNRS
DR1 LORIA UMR7503 Nancy for Claire Gardent and Christophe Cerisara; MAS Lab-
oratory of Ecole Centrale Paris for Céline Hudelot, RCLN/LIPN UMR 7030 University
Sorbonne-Paris-Nord/CNRS for Joseph Le Roux and Nadi Tomeh, Université de Paris and
Necker - Enfants Malades hospital for Antoine Neuraz and Ivan Lerner, Université Paris
Saclay LISN CNRS UMR9105 for Aurélie Névéol, Anne-Laure Ligozat, Caio Corro, Fran-
cois Yvon; Inria, Univ. Bordeaux and Ensta ParisTech for Pierre-Yves Oudeyer, Cédric
Colas, Grgur Kovac, Tristan Karch; Inria Paris for Benoˆ ıt Sagot, Djamé Seddah, Pedro
Ortiz; University Toulouse CNRS for Ludovic Tanguy, Sorbonne Université, LIMICS (Sor-
bonne Université, Inserm, Univ. Sorbonne Paris Nord) for Xavier Tannier; I3S Laboratory,
CNRS, INRIA, Université Cote d’Azur for Serena Villata and Elena Cabrio; Airbus, Cen-
tral Research & Technology for Guillaume Alleon, Alexandre Arnold, and Catherine Kobus;
Cloud Temple for Jean-Michel Dussoux; Illuin Technology for Robert Vesoul, Gautier Vi-
aud, Martin d’Hoffschmidt, and Wacim Belblidia; Levia.ai for Romain Riviere; LightOn
for Igor Carron, Laurent Daudet, Iacopo Poli, and Julien Launay; Nabla for Alexandre
Lebrun, Martin Raison, and Samuel Humeau; Naver Labs Europe for Matthias Gallé and
Laurent Besacier; Orange Labs for Géraldine Damnati, Johannes Heinecke, and Frederic
Herledan; OVHcloud for Jean-Louis Queguiner and Guillaume Salou; ReciTAL for Thomas
Scialom, Gilles Moyse, and Jacopo Staiano; Renault Group for Vincent Feuillard, Joan
André, Francois-Paul Servant, Raphael Sourty, and Ayhan Uyanik; SYSTRAN for Jean
Senellart, Josep Crego, Elise Michon, Guillaume Klein, Dakun Zhang, and Natalia Segal;
Ubisoft for Guillaume Gaudron. Leipzig University and the Center for Scalable Data Ana-
lytics and Artificial Intelligence (ScaDS.AI) in Leipzig for Christopher Akiki.
Hugging Face provided storage for the entirety of the project, as well as compute for de-
velopment and part of training the smaller BLOOM models. Many of the evaluations in this
paper were made possible by compute resources donated by CoreWeave and EleutherAI.
References
Julien Abadji, Pedro Javier Ortiz Suárez, Laurent Romary, and Benoˆ ıt Sagot. Ungoliant:
An optimized pipeline for the generation of a very large-scale multilingual web corpus.
In Harald L¨ ungen, Marc Kupietz, Piotr Ba´ nski, Adrien Barbaresi, Simon Clematide,
and Ines Pisetta, editors, Proceedings of the Workshop on Challenges in the Management
of Large Corpora (CMLC-9) , pages 1–9, Limerick, Ireland, 2021. Leibniz-Institut f¨ ur
Deutsche Sprache. doi: 10.14618/ids-pub-10468. URL https://nbn-resolving.org/
45BigScience Workshop
urn:nbn:de:bsz:mh39-104688 .
Judit Ács. Exploring bert’s vocabulary, 2019. URL http://juditacs.github.io/2019/
02/19/bert-tokenization-stats.html .
Yossi Adi, Einat Kermany, Yonatan Belinkov, Ofer Lavi, and Yoav Goldberg. Fine-grained
analysis of sentence embeddings using auxiliary prediction tasks. In International Con-
ference on Learning Representations (ICLR) , April 2017.
Christopher Akiki, Giada Pistilli, Margot Mieskes, Matthias Gallé, Thomas Wolf, Suzana
Ili´ c, and Yacine Jernite. BigScience: A Case Study in the Social Construction of a
Multilingual Large Language Model, 2022. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2212.04960 .
RamiAl-Rfou, DokookChoe, NoahConstant, MandyGuo, andLlionJones. Character-level
language modeling with deeper self-attention. In Proceedings of the AAAI conference on
artificial intelligence , 2019.
Yousef Altaher, Ali Fadel, Mazen Alotaibi, Mazen Alyazidi, Mishari Al-Mutairi, Mut-
laq Aldhbuiub, Abdulrahman Mosaibah, Abdelrahman Rezk, Abdulrazzaq Alhendi,
Mazen Abo Shal, Emad A. Alghamdi, Maged Saeed AlShaibani, Jezia Zakraoui, Wafaa
Mohammed, Kamel Gaanoun, Khalid N. Elmadani, Mustafa Ghaleb, Nouamane Tazi,
Raed Alharbi, Maraim Masoud, and Zaid Alyafeai. Masader plus: A new inter-
face for exploring +500 arabic NLP datasets. CoRR, abs/2208.00932, 2022. doi:
10.48550/arXiv.2208.00932. URL https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2208.00932 .
Zaid Alyafeai, Maraim Masoud, Mustafa Ghaleb, and Maged Saeed AlShaibani. Masader:
Metadata sourcing for arabic text and speech data resources. CoRR, abs/2110.06744,
2021. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2110.06744 .
Stephen Bach, Victor Sanh, Zheng Xin Yong, Albert Webson, Colin Raffel, Nihal V. Nayak,
Abheesht Sharma, Taewoon Kim, M Saiful Bari, Thibault Fevry, Zaid Alyafeai, Manan
Dey, Andrea Santilli, Zhiqing Sun, Srulik Ben-david, Canwen Xu, Gunjan Chhablani,
Han Wang, Jason Fries, Maged Al-shaibani, Shanya Sharma, Urmish Thakker, Khalid
Almubarak, Xiangru Tang, Dragomir Radev, Mike Tian-jian Jiang, and Alexander Rush.
PromptSource: An integrated development environment and repository for natural lan-
guage prompts. In Proceedings of the 60th Annual Meeting of the Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics: System Demonstrations , pages 93–104, Dublin, Ireland, May 2022.
Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2022.acl-demo.9. URL
https://aclanthology.org/2022.acl-demo.9 .
Nesrine Bannour, Sahar Ghannay, Aurélie Névéol, and Anne-Laure Ligozat. Evaluating the
carbon footprint of NLP methods: a survey and analysis of existing tools. In Proceedings
of the Second Workshop on Simple and Efficient Natural Language Processing , pages 11–
21, Virtual, November 2021. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/
v1/2021.sustainlp-1.2. URL https://aclanthology.org/2021.sustainlp-1.2 .
Rachel Bawden and Fran¸ cois Yvon. Investigating the translation performance of a large
multilingual language model: the case of BLOOM. CoRR, abs/2303.01911, 2023. doi:
10.48550/arXiv.2303.01911. URL https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2303.01911 .
46BLOOM
Rachel Bawden, Eric Bilinski, Thomas Lavergne, and Sophie Rosset. DiaBLa: A Corpus of
Bilingual Spontaneous Written Dialogues for Machine Translation. Language Resources
and Evaluation , pages 635–660, 2020. doi: 10.1007/s10579-020-09514-4. URL https:
//doi.org/10.1007/s10579-020-09514-4 .
Yonatan Belinkov. Probing classifiers: Promises, shortcomings, and advances. Compu-
tational Linguistics , 48(1):207–219, March 2022. doi: 10.1162/coli_a_00422. URL
https://aclanthology.org/2022.cl-1.7 .
Yonatan Belinkov and James Glass. Analysis methods in neural language processing: A sur-
vey.Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics , 7:49–72, March 2019.
doi: 10.1162/tacl_a_00254. URL https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/Q19-1004 .
Yonatan Belinkov, Nadir Durrani, Fahim Dalvi, Hassan Sajjad, and James Glass. What
do neural machine translation models learn about morphology? In Proceedings of the
55th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long
Papers), pages 861–872, Vancouver, Canada, July 2017. Association for Computational
Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/P17-1080. URL https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/
P17-1080 .
Emily M Bender, Timnit Gebru, Angelina McMillan-Major, and Shmargaret Shmitchell.
On the dangers of stochastic parrots: Can language models be too big? In Proceedings of
the 2021 ACM Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency , pages 610–623,
2021.
Yoshua Bengio, Réjean Ducharme, and Pascal Vincent. A neural probabilistic language
model.Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 2000.
Stella Biderman, Kieran Bicheno, and Leo Gao. Datasheet for the pile. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2201.07311 , 2022.
BigScience Workshop. BLOOM (revision 4ab0472), 2022. URL https://huggingface.co/
bigscience/bloom .
Abeba Birhane, Vinay Uday Prabhu, and Emmanuel Kahembwe. Multimodal datasets:
misogyny, pornography, and malignant stereotypes. ArXiv, abs/2110.01963, 2021.
AbebaBirhane, PratyushaKalluri, DallasCard, WilliamAgnew, RavitDotan, andMichelle
Bao. The values encoded in machine learning research. In 2022 ACM Conference on
Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency , FAccT ’22, page 173–184, New York, NY,
USA, 2022. Association for Computing Machinery. ISBN 9781450393522. doi: 10.1145/
3531146.3533083. URL https://doi.org/10.1145/3531146.3533083 .
Sid Black, Leo Gao, Phil Wang, Connor Leahy, and Stella Biderman. Gpt-neo: Large scale
autoregressive language modeling with mesh-tensorflow, march 2021. URL https://doi.
org/10.5281/zenodo , 5297715.
Sid Black, Stella Biderman, Eric Hallahan, Quentin Anthony, Leo Gao, Laurence Golding,
Horace He, Connor Leahy, Kyle McDonell, Jason Phang, et al. GPT-NeoX-20B: An
open-source autoregressive language model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.06745 , 2022.
47BigScience Workshop
Su Lin Blodgett, Gilsinia Lopez, Alexandra Olteanu, Robert Sim, and Hanna Wal-
lach. Stereotyping Norwegian salmon: An inventory of pitfalls in fairness benchmark
datasets. In Proceedings of the 59th Annual Meeting of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics and the 11th International Joint Conference on Natural Lan-
guage Processing (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 1004–1015, Online, August 2021.
Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2021.acl-long.81. URL
https://aclanthology.org/2021.acl-long.81 .
Ondˇ rej Bojar, Christian Buck, Christian Federmann, Barry Haddow, Philipp Koehn, Jo-
hannesLeveling,ChristofMonz,PavelPecina,MattPost,HerveSaint-Amand,RaduSori-
cut, Lucia Specia, and Aleˇ s Tamchyna. Findings of the 2014 workshop on statistical ma-
chine translation. In Proceedings of the Ninth Workshop on Statistical Machine Transla-
tion, pages 12–58, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, June 2014. Association for Computational
Linguistics. doi: 10.3115/v1/W14-3302. URL https://aclanthology.org/W14-3302 .
J. Scott Brennen. An industry-led debate: how uk media cover artificial intelligence, 2018.
J Scott Brennen, Philip N Howard, and Rasmus K Nielsen. What to expect when you’re
expecting robots: Futures, expectations, and pseudo-artificial general intelligence in uk
news.Journalism , 23(1):22–38, 2022. doi: 10.1177/1464884920947535. URL https:
//doi.org/10.1177/1464884920947535 .
Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla
Dhariwal, Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Sandhini
Agarwal, Ariel Herbert-Voss, Gretchen Krueger, Tom Henighan, Rewon Child, Aditya
Ramesh, Daniel Ziegler, Jeffrey Wu, Clemens Winter, Chris Hesse, Mark Chen, Eric
Sigler, Mateusz Litwin, Scott Gray, Benjamin Chess, Jack Clark, Christopher Berner,
Sam McCandlish, Alec Radford, Ilya Sutskever, and Dario Amodei. Language models
are few-shot learners. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 2020.
Isaac Caswell, Julia Kreutzer, Lisa Wang, Ahsan Wahab, Daan van Esch, Nasanbayar
Ulzii-Orshikh, Allahsera Auguste Tapo, Nishant Subramani, Artem Sokolov, Claytone
Sikasote, Monang Setyawan, Supheakmungkol Sarin, Sokhar Samb, Benoˆ ıt Sagot, Clara
Rivera, Annette Rios Gonzales, Isabel Papadimitriou, Salomey Osei, Pedro Ortiz Suarez,
IroroOrife,KelechiOgueji,RubungoAndreNiyongabo,ToanQ.Nguyen,MathiasMuller,
Andre Matthias Muller, Shamsuddeen Hassan Muhammad, Nanda Firdausi Muhammad,
Ayanda Mnyakeni, Jamshidbek Mirzakhalov, Tapiwanashe Matangira, Colin Leong, Nze
Lawson, Sneha Kudugunta, Yacine Jernite, M. Jenny, Orhan Firat, Bonaventure F. P.
Dossou, Sakhile Dlamini, Nisansa de Silva, Sakine cCabuk Balli, Stella Rose Biderman,
Alessia Battisti, Ahmed Baruwa, Ankur Bapna, Pallavi N. Baljekar, Israel Abebe Azime,
Ayodele Awokoya, Duygu Ataman, Orevaoghene Ahia, Oghenefego Ahia, Sweta Agrawal,
and Mofetoluwa Adeyemi. Quality at a glance: An audit of web-crawled multilingual
datasets. Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics , 10:50–72, 2022.
Mark Chen, Jerry Tworek, Heewoo Jun, Qiming Yuan, Henrique Ponde de Oliveira Pinto,
Jared Kaplan, Harri Edwards, Yuri Burda, Nicholas Joseph, Greg Brockman, et al. Eval-
uating large language models trained on code. arXiv preprint arXiv:2107.03374 , 2021.
48BLOOM
Leshem Choshen, Guy Hacohen, Daphna Weinshall, and Omri Abend. The grammar-
learningtrajectoriesofneurallanguagemodels. In Proceedings of the 60th Annual Meeting
of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 8281–
8297, Dublin, Ireland, May 2022. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.
18653/v1/2022.acl-long.568. URL https://aclanthology.org/2022.acl-long.568 .
Aakanksha Chowdhery, Sharan Narang, Jacob Devlin, Maarten Bosma, Gaurav Mishra,
Adam Roberts, Paul Barham, Hyung Won Chung, Charles Sutton, Sebastian Gehrmann,
Parker Schuh, Kensen Shi, Sasha Tsvyashchenko, Joshua Maynez, Parker Barnes Ab-
hishek Rao, Yi Tay, Noam Shazeer, Vinodkumar Prabhakaran, Emily Reif, Nan Du, Ben
Hutchinson, Reiner Pope, James Bradbury, Jacob Austin, Michael Isard, Guy Gur-Ari,
Pengcheng Yin, Toju Duke, Anselm Levskaya, Sanjay Ghemawat, Sunipa Dev, Hen-
ryk Michalewski, Xavier Garcia, Vedant Misra, Kevin Robinson, Liam Fedus, Denny
Zhou, Daphne Ippolito, David Luan, Hyeontaek Lim, Barret Zoph, Alexander Spiridonov,
Ryan Sepassi, David Dohan, Shivani Agrawal, Mark Omernick, Andrew M. Dai, Thanu-
malayan Sankaranarayana Pillai, Marie Pellat, Aitor Lewkowycz, Erica Moreira, Rewon
Child, Oleksandr Polozov, Katherine Lee, Zongwei Zhou, Xuezhi Wang, Brennan Saeta,
Mark Diaz, Orhan Firat, Michele Catasta, Jason Wei, Kathy Meier-Hellstern, Douglas
Eck, Jeff Dean, Slav Petrov, and Noah Fiedel. Palm: Scaling language modeling with
pathways. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.02311 , 2022.
Hyung Won Chung, Le Hou, Shayne Longpre, Barret Zoph, Yi Tay, William Fedus, Eric
Li, Xuezhi Wang, Mostafa Dehghani, Siddhartha Brahma, et al. Scaling instruction-
finetuned language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.11416 , 2022.
Ronan Collobert, Jason Weston, Léon Bottou, Michael Karlen, Koray Kavukcuoglu, and
Pavel Kuksa. Natural language processing (almost) from scratch. Journal of machine
learning research , 12, 2011.
Alexis Conneau, German Kruszewski, Guillaume Lample, Lo¨ ıc Barrault, and Marco Ba-
roni. What you can cram into a single $&!#* vector: Probing sentence embeddings for
linguistic properties. In Proceedings of the 56th Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 2126–2136, Melbourne, Aus-
tralia, July 2018. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/P18-1198.
URL https://aclanthology.org/P18-1198 .
Alexis Conneau, Kartikay Khandelwal, Naman Goyal, Vishrav Chaudhary, Guillaume Wen-
zek, Francisco Guzmán, Edouard Grave, Myle Ott, Luke Zettlemoyer, and Veselin Stoy-
anov. Unsupervised cross-lingual representation learning at scale. In Proceedings of the
58th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics , pages 8440–8451,
Online, July 2020. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2020.
acl-main.747. URL https://aclanthology.org/2020.acl-main.747 .
Danish Contractor, Daniel McDuff, Julia Katherine Haines, Jenny Lee, Christopher Hines,
Brent Hecht, Nicholas Vincent, and Hanlin Li. Behavioral use licensing for responsible
ai. In2022 ACM Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency , FAccT
’22, page 778–788, New York, NY, USA, 2022. Association for Computing Machinery.
49BigScience Workshop
ISBN 9781450393522. doi: 10.1145/3531146.3533143. URL https://doi.org/10.1145/
3531146.3533143 .
Francesco De Toni, Christopher Akiki, Javier De La Rosa, Clémentine Fourrier, Enrique
Manjavacas, Stefan Schweter, and Daniel Van Strien. Entities, dates, and languages:
Zero-shot on historical texts with t0. In Proceedings of BigScience Episode #5 – Work-
shop on Challenges & Perspectives in Creating Large Language Models , pages 75–83,
virtual+Dublin, May 2022. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/
v1/2022.bigscience-1.7. URL https://aclanthology.org/2022.bigscience-1.7 .
Tim Dettmers, Mike Lewis, Younes Belkada, and Luke Zettlemoyer. LLM.int8(): 8-bit
matrix multiplication for transformers at scale. arXiv preprint arXiv:2208.07339 , 2022.
Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. BERT: Pre-training
of deep bidirectional transformers for language understanding. In Conference of the North
American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics , 2019.
Jesse Dodge, Maarten Sap, Ana Marasovi´ c, William Agnew, Gabriel Ilharco, Dirk Groen-
eveld, Margaret Mitchell, and Matt Gardner. Documenting large webtext corpora: A
case study on the colossal clean crawled corpus. In Conference on Empirical Methods in
Natural Language Processing , 2021.
Allyson Ettinger, Ahmed Elgohary, and Philip Resnik. Probing for semantic evidence of
composition by means of simple classification tasks. In Proceedings of the 1st Workshop
on Evaluating Vector-Space Representations for NLP , pages 134–139, Berlin, Germany,
August 2016. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/W16-2524.
URL https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/W16-2524 .
AngelaFan, ShrutiBhosale, HolgerSchwenk, ZhiyiMa, AhmedEl-Kishky, SiddharthGoyal,
Mandeep Baines, Onur Celebi, Guillaume Wenzek, Vishrav Chaudhary, Naman Goyal,
Tom Birch, Vitaliy Liptchinsky, Sergey Edunov, Michael Auli, and Armand Joulin. Be-
yond English-Centric multilingual machine translation. Journal of Machine Learning
Research , 22(107):1–48, 2021. URL http://jmlr.org/papers/v22/20-1307.html .
William Fedus, Barret Zoph, and Noam Shazeer. Switch transformers: Scaling to tril-
lion parameter models with simple and efficient sparsity. Journal of Machine Learning
Research , 23(120):1–39, 2022.
Jack FitzGerald, Christopher Hench, Charith Peris, Scott Mackie, Kay Rottmann, Ana
Sanchez, Aaron Nash, Liam Urbach, Vishesh Kakarala, Richa Singh, Swetha Ranganath,
Laurie Crist, Misha Britan, Wouter Leeuwis, Gokhan Tur, and Prem Natarajan. Massive:
A1m-examplemultilingualnaturallanguageunderstandingdatasetwith51typologically-
diverse languages, 2022. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2204.08582 .
Daniel Fried, Armen Aghajanyan, Jessy Lin, Sida Wang, Eric Wallace, Freda Shi, Ruiqi
Zhong, Wen-tau Yih, Luke Zettlemoyer, and Mike Lewis. Incoder: A generative model
for code infilling and synthesis. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.05999 , 2022.
50BLOOM
Jason Alan Fries, Natasha Seelam, Gabriel Altay, Leon Weber, Myungsun Kang, Debajyoti
Datta, Ruisi Su, Samuele Garda, Bo Wang, Simon Ott, Matthias Samwald, and Wojciech
Kusa. Dataset debt in biomedical language modeling. In Challenges & Perspectives
in Creating Large Language Models , 2022a. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=
HRfzInfr8Z9 .
Jason Alan Fries, Leon Weber, Natasha Seelam, Gabriel Altay, Debajyoti Datta, Samuele
Garda, Myungsun Kang, Ruisi Su, Wojciech Kusa, Samuel Cahyawijaya, Fabio Barth,
Simon Ott, Matthias Samwald, Stephen Bach, Stella Biderman, Mario S¨ anger, Bo Wang,
Alison Callahan, Daniel León Peri˜ nán, Théo Gigant, Patrick Haller, Jenny Chim,
Jose David Posada, John Michael Giorgi, Karthik Rangasai Sivaraman, Marc Pàmies,
MariannaNezhurina, RobertMartin, MichaelCullan, MoritzFreidank, NathanDahlberg,
Shubhanshu Mishra, Shamik Bose, Nicholas Michio Broad, Yanis Labrak, Shlok S Desh-
mukh, Sid Kiblawi, Ayush Singh, Minh Chien Vu, Trishala Neeraj, Jonas Golde, Al-
bert Villanova del Moral, and Benjamin Beilharz. BigBio: A framework for data-
centric biomedical natural language processing. In Thirty-sixth Conference on Neu-
ral Information Processing Systems Datasets and Benchmarks Track , 2022b. URL
https://openreview.net/forum?id=8lQDn9zTQlW .
Daniel Y Fu, Tri Dao, Khaled Kamal Saab, Armin W Thomas, Atri Rudra, and Christopher
Re. Hungry hungry hippos: Towards language modeling with state space models. In
The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations , 2023. URL https:
//openreview.net/forum?id=COZDy0WYGg .
Philip Gage. A new algorithm for data compression. C Users J. , 12(2):23–38, feb 1994.
ISSN 0898-9788.
Leo Gao, Stella Biderman, Sid Black, Laurence Golding, Travis Hoppe, Charles Foster,
Jason Phang, Horace He, Anish Thite, Noa Nabeshima, Shawn Presser, and Connor
Leahy. The pile: An 800gb dataset of diverse text for language modeling. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2101.00027 , 2020.
Leo Gao, Jonathan Tow, Stella Biderman, Sid Black, Anthony DiPofi, Charles Foster,
Laurence Golding, Jeffrey Hsu, Kyle McDonell, Niklas Muennighoff, Jason Phang, Laria
Reynolds, Eric Tang, Anish Thite, Ben Wang, Kevin Wang, and Andy Zou. A framework
for few-shot language model evaluation, September 2021. URL https://doi.org/10.
5281/zenodo.5371628 .
Sebastian Gehrmann, Abhik Bhattacharjee, Abinaya Mahendiran, Alex Wang, Alexan-
dros Papangelis, Aman Madaan, Angelina McMillan-Major, Anna Shvets, Ashish Upad-
hyay, Bingsheng Yao, Bryan Wilie, Chandra Bhagavatula, Chaobin You, Craig Thomson,
Cristina Garbacea, Dakuo Wang, Daniel Deutsch, Deyi Xiong, Di Jin, Dimitra Gkatzia,
DragomirRadev, ElizabethClark, EsinDurmus, FaisalLadhak, FilipGinter, GentaIndra
Winata, Hendrik Strobelt, Hiroaki Hayashi, Jekaterina Novikova, Jenna Kanerva, Jenny
Chim, Jiawei Zhou, Jordan Clive, Joshua Maynez, João Sedoc, Juraj Juraska, Kaustubh
Dhole, Khyathi Raghavi Chandu, Laura Perez-Beltrachini, Leonardo F. R. Ribeiro, Lewis
Tunstall, Li Zhang, Mahima Pushkarna, Mathias Creutz, Michael White, Mihir Sanjay
51BigScience Workshop
Kale, Moussa Kamal Eddine, Nico Daheim, Nishant Subramani, Ondrej Dusek, Paul Pu
Liang, Pawan Sasanka Ammanamanchi, Qi Zhu, Ratish Puduppully, Reno Kriz, Rifat
Shahriyar, RonaldCardenas, SaadMahamood, SalomeyOsei, SamuelCahyawijaya, Sanja
ˇStajner, Sebastien Montella, Shailza, Shailza Jolly, Simon Mille, Tahmid Hasan, Tianhao
Shen, Tosin Adewumi, Vikas Raunak, Vipul Raheja, Vitaly Nikolaev, Vivian Tsai, Yacine
Jernite, Ying Xu, Yisi Sang, Yixin Liu, and Yufang Hou. Gemv2: Multilingual nlg bench-
marking in a single line of code, 2022a. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2206.11249 .
Sebastian Gehrmann, Elizabeth Clark, and Thibault Sellam. Repairing the cracked foun-
dation: A survey of obstacles in evaluation practices for generated text, 2022b. URL
https://arxiv.org/abs/2202.06935 .
Joshua T. Goodman. A bit of progress in language modeling. Computer Speech & Language ,
15(4), 2001.
Naman Goyal, Cynthia Gao, Vishrav Chaudhary, Peng-Jen Chen, Guillaume Wenzek,
Da Ju, Sanjana Krishnan, Marc’Aurelio Ranzato, Francisco Guzmán, and Angela Fan.
The Flores-101 evaluation benchmark for low-resource and multilingual machine trans-
lation.Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics , 10:522–538, 2022.
doi: 10.1162/tacl_a_00474. URL https://aclanthology.org/2022.tacl-1.30 .
Alex Graves. Generating sequences with recurrent neural networks. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1308.0850 , 2013.
Albert Gu, Tri Dao, Stefano Ermon, Atri Rudra, and Christopher Ré. Hippo: Recurrent
memorywithoptimalpolynomialprojections. Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems, 33:1474–1487, 2020.
Albert Gu, Karan Goel, and Christopher Re. Efficiently modeling long sequences with
structured state spaces. In International Conference on Learning Representations , 2021.
Joel Hestness, Sharan Narang, Newsha Ardalani, Gregory Diamos, Heewoo Jun, Hassan
Kianinejad, Md Patwary, Mostofa Ali, Yang Yang, and Yanqi Zhou. Deep learning scaling
is predictable, empirically. arXiv preprint arXiv:1712.00409 , 2017.
John Hewitt and Percy Liang. Designing and interpreting probes with control tasks. In
Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing
and the 9th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (EMNLP-
IJCNLP) , pages 2733–2743, Hong Kong, China, November 2019. Association for Com-
putational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/D19-1275. URL https://aclanthology.org/
D19-1275 .
Jordan Hoffmann, Sebastian Borgeaud, Arthur Mensch, Elena Buchatskaya, Trevor Cai,
Eliza Rutherford, Diego de Las Casas, Lisa Anne Hendricks, Johannes Welbl, Aidan
Clark, Tom Hennigan, Eric Noland, Katie Millican, George van den Driessche, Bogdan
Damoc, Aurelia Guy, Simon Osindero, Karen Simonyan, Erich Elsen, Jack W. Rae, Oriol
Vinyals, and Laurent Sifre. Training compute-optimal large language models. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2203.15556 , 2022.
52BLOOM
Jeremy Howard and Sebastian Ruder. Universal language model fine-tuning for text classi-
fication. In Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics , 2018.
Dieuwke Hupkes, Sara Veldhoen, and Willem Zuidema. Visualisation and ’diagnostic clas-
sifiers’ reveal how recurrent and recursive neural networks process hierarchical structure.
Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research , 61:907–926, 2018.
Yacine Jernite, Huu Nguyen, Stella Biderman, Anna Rogers, Maraim Masoud, Valentin
Danchev, Samson Tan, Alexandra Sasha Luccioni, Nishant Subramani, Isaac Johnson,
Gerard Dupont, Jesse Dodge, Kyle Lo, Zeerak Talat, Dragomir Radev, Aaron Gokaslan,
Somaieh Nikpoor, Peter Henderson, Rishi Bommasani, and Margaret Mitchell. Data
governance in the age of large-scale data-driven language technology. In 2022 ACM
Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency , FAccT ’22, page 2206–2222,
New York, NY, USA, 2022. Association for Computing Machinery. ISBN 9781450393522.
doi: 10.1145/3531146.3534637. URL https://doi.org/10.1145/3531146.3534637 .
Rebecca Lynn Johnson, Giada Pistilli, Natalia Men’edez-Gonz’alez, Leslye Denisse Dias
Duran, Enrico Panai, Julija Kalpokien˙ e, and Donald Jay Bertulfo. The ghost in the
machine has an american accent: value conflict in gpt-3. ArXiv, abs/2203.07785, 2022.
DhirajKalamkar,DheevatsaMudigere,NaveenMellempudi,DipankarDas,KunalBanerjee,
Sasikanth Avancha, Dharma Teja Vooturi, Nataraj Jammalamadaka, Jianyu Huang, Hec-
tor Yuen, Jiyan Yang, Jongsoo Park, Alexander Heinecke, Evangelos Georganas, Sudar-
shan Srinivasan, Abhisek Kundu, Misha Smelyanskiy, Bharat Kaul, and Pradeep Dubey.
A study of bfloat16 for deep learning training, 2019.
Jared Kaplan, Sam McCandlish, Tom Henighan, Tom B Brown, Benjamin Chess, Rewon
Child, Scott Gray, Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, and Dario Amodei. Scaling laws for neural
language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2001.08361 , 2020.
Boseop Kim, HyoungSeok Kim, Sang-Woo Lee, Gichang Lee, Donghyun Kwak, Jeon
Dong Hyeon, Sunghyun Park, Sungju Kim, Seonhoon Kim, Dongpil Seo, Heungsub
Lee, Minyoung Jeong, Sungjae Lee, Minsub Kim, Suk Hyun Ko, Seokhun Kim, Taeyong
Park, Jinuk Kim, Soyoung Kang, Na-Hyeon Ryu, Kang Min Yoo, Minsuk Chang, Soobin
Suh, Sookyo In, Jinseong Park, Kyungduk Kim, Hiun Kim, Jisu Jeong, Yong Goo Yeo,
Donghoon Ham, Dongju Park, Min Young Lee, Jaewook Kang, Inho Kang, Jung-Woo
Ha, Woomyoung Park, and Nako Sung. What changes can large-scale language mod-
els bring? intensive study on HyperCLOVA: Billions-scale korean generative pretrained
transformers. In Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , 2021.
Walter Kl¨ opffer. Life cycle assessment. Environmental Science and Pollution Research , 4
(4):223–228, 1997.
Taku Kudo and John Richardson. SentencePiece: A simple and language independent sub-
word tokenizer and detokenizer for neural text processing. In Proceedings of the 2018
Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing: System Demonstra-
tions, pages 66–71, Brussels, Belgium, November 2018. Association for Computational
Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/D18-2012. URL https://aclanthology.org/D18-2012 .
53BigScience Workshop
Anoop Kunchukuttan, Divyanshu Kakwani, Satish Golla, C. GokulN., Avik Bhattacharyya,
Mitesh M. Khapra, and Pratyush Kumar. Ai4bharat-indicnlp corpus: Monolingual cor-
pora and word embeddings for indic languages. ArXiv, abs/2005.00085, 2020.
AlexandreLacoste, AlexandraLuccioni, VictorSchmidt, andThomasDandres. Quantifying
the carbon emissions of machine learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.09700 , 2019.
Faisal Ladhak, Esin Durmus, Claire Cardie, and Kathleen McKeown. WikiLingua: A new
benchmarkdatasetforcross-lingualabstractivesummarization. In Findings of the Associ-
ation for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2020 , pages 4034–4048, Online, November
2020. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2020.findings-emnlp.
360. URL https://aclanthology.org/2020.findings-emnlp.360 .
Hugo Lauren¸ con, Lucile Saulnier, Thomas Wang, Christopher Akiki, Albert Villanova del
Moral, Teven Le Scao, Leandro Von Werra, Chenghao Mou, Eduardo González Ponfer-
rada, Huu Nguyen, J¨ org Frohberg, Mario ˇSaˇ sko, Quentin Lhoest, Angelina McMillan-
Major, Gérard Dupont, Stella Biderman, Anna Rogers, Loubna Ben allal, Francesco De
Toni, Giada Pistilli, Olivier Nguyen, Somaieh Nikpoor, Maraim Masoud, Pierre Colombo,
Javier de la Rosa, Paulo Villegas, Tristan Thrush, Shayne Longpre, Sebastian Nagel,
Leon Weber, Manuel Romero Mu˜ noz, Jian Zhu, Daniel Van Strien, Zaid Alyafeai,
Khalid Almubarak, Vu Minh Chien, Itziar Gonzalez-Dios, Aitor Soroa, Kyle Lo, Manan
Dey, Pedro Ortiz Suarez, Aaron Gokaslan, Shamik Bose, David Ifeoluwa Adelani, Long
Phan, Hieu Tran, Ian Yu, Suhas Pai, Jenny Chim, Violette Lepercq, Suzana Ilic, Mar-
garet Mitchell, Sasha Luccioni, and Yacine Jernite. The BigScience ROOTS corpus:
A 1.6TB composite multilingual dataset. In Thirty-sixth Conference on Neural In-
formation Processing Systems Datasets and Benchmarks Track , 2022. URL https:
//openreview.net/forum?id=UoEw6KigkUn .
Teven Le Scao, Thomas Wang, Daniel Hesslow, Lucile Saulnier, Stas Bekman, M Saiful
Bari, Stella Biderman, Hady Elsahar, Niklas Muennighoff, Jason Phang, Ofir Press,
Colin Raffel, Victor Sanh, Sheng Shen, Lintang Sutawika, Jaesung Tae, Zheng Xin Yong,
Julien Launay, and Iz Beltagy. What language model to train if you have one million
GPU hours? In Challenges & Perspectives in Creating Large Language Models , 2022.
URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=rI7BL3fHIZq .
Mike Lewis, Yinhan Liu, Naman Goyal, Marjan Ghazvininejad, Abdelrahman Mohamed,
Omer Levy, Veselin Stoyanov, and Luke Zettlemoyer. BART: Denoising sequence-to-
sequence pre-training for natural language generation, translation, and comprehension.
InAnnual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics , 2020.
Quentin Lhoest, Albert Villanova del Moral, Yacine Jernite, Abhishek Thakur, Patrick
von Platen, Suraj Patil, Julien Chaumond, Mariama Drame, Julien Plu, Lewis Tunstall,
Joe Davison, Mario ˇSaˇ sko, Gunjan Chhablani, Bhavitvya Malik, Simon Brandeis, Teven
Le Scao, Victor Sanh, Canwen Xu, Nicolas Patry, Angelina McMillan-Major, Philipp
Schmid, SylvainGugger, ClémentDelangue, ThéoMatussière, LysandreDebut, StasBek-
man, Pierric Cistac, Thibault Goehringer, Victor Mustar, Fran¸ cois Lagunas, Alexander
Rush, and Thomas Wolf. Datasets: A community library for natural language process-
ing. InProceedings of the 2021 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
54BLOOM
Processing: System Demonstrations , pages 175–184, Online and Punta Cana, Dominican
Republic, November 2021. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/
2021.emnlp-demo.21. URL https://aclanthology.org/2021.emnlp-demo.21 .
Yujia Li, David H. Choi, Junyoung Chung, Nate Kushman, Julian Schrittwieser, Rémi
Leblond, Tom Eccles, James Keeling, Felix Gimeno, Agustin Dal Lago, Thomas Hu-
bert, Peter Choy, Cyprien de Masson d’Autume, Igor Babuschkin, Xinyun Chen, Po-
Sen Huang, Johannes Welbl, Sven Gowal, Alexey Cherepanov, James Molloy, Daniel J.
Mankowitz, Esme Sutherland Robson, Pushmeet Kohli, Nando de Freitas, Koray
Kavukcuoglu, and Oriol Vinyals. Competition-level code generation with AlphaCode.
CoRR, abs/2203.07814, 2022. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2203.07814. URL https://doi.org/
10.48550/arXiv.2203.07814 .
Percy Liang, Rishi Bommasani, Tony Lee, Dimitris Tsipras, Dilara Soylu, Michihiro Ya-
sunaga, Yian Zhang, Deepak Narayanan, Yuhuai Wu, Ananya Kumar, Benjamin New-
man, Binhang Yuan, Bobby Yan, Ce Zhang, Christian Cosgrove, Christopher D. Man-
ning, Christopher Ré, Diana Acosta-Navas, Drew A. Hudson, Eric Zelikman, Esin Dur-
mus, Faisal Ladhak, Frieda Rong, Hongyu Ren, Huaxiu Yao, Jue Wang, Keshav San-
thanam, Laurel Orr, Lucia Zheng, Mert Yuksekgonul, Mirac Suzgun, Nathan Kim, Neel
Guha, Niladri Chatterji, Omar Khattab, Peter Henderson, Qian Huang, Ryan Chi,
Sang Michael Xie, Shibani Santurkar, Surya Ganguli, Tatsunori Hashimoto, Thomas
Icard, Tianyi Zhang, Vishrav Chaudhary, William Wang, Xuechen Li, Yifan Mai,
Yuhui Zhang, and Yuta Koreeda. Holistic evaluation of language models, 2022. URL
https://arxiv.org/abs/2211.09110 .
Chin-Yew Lin. ROUGE: A package for automatic evaluation of summaries. In Text Sum-
marization Branches Out , pages 74–81, Barcelona, Spain, July 2004. Association for
Computational Linguistics. URL https://aclanthology.org/W04-1013 .
Xi Victoria Lin, Todor Mihaylov, Mikel Artetxe, Tianlu Wang, Shuohui Chen, Daniel Simig,
Myle Ott, Naman Goyal, Shruti Bhosale, Jingfei Du, Ramakanth Pasunuru, Sam Shleifer,
Punit Singh Koura, Vishrav Chaudhary, Brian O’Horo, Jeff Wang, Luke Zettlemoyer,
Zornitsa Kozareva, Mona Diab, Veselin Stoyanov, and Xian Li. Few-shot learning with
multilingual language models, 2021. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2112.10668 .
Yinhan Liu, Myle Ott, Naman Goyal, Jingfei Du, Mandar Joshi, Danqi Chen, Omer Levy,
Mike Lewis, Luke Zettlemoyer, and Veselin Stoyanov. RoBERTa: A robustly optimized
BERT pretraining approach. arXiv preprint arXiv:1907.11692 , 2019.
Kyle Lo, Lucy Lu Wang, Mark Neumann, Rodney Michael Kinney, and Daniel S. Weld.
S2ORC: The semantic scholar open research corpus. In ACL, 2020.
Ilya Loshchilov and Frank Hutter. SGDR: stochastic gradient descent with restarts. CoRR,
abs/1608.03983, 2016. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1608.03983 .
Alexandra Sasha Luccioni, Sylvain Viguier, and Anne-Laure Ligozat. Estimating the
Carbon Footprint of BLOOM, a 176B Parameter Language Model. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2211.02001 , 2022.
55BigScience Workshop
Harish Tayyar Madabushi, Edward Gow-Smith, Marcos Garcia, Carolina Scarton, Marco
Idiart, and Aline Villavicencio. Semeval-2022 task 2: Multilingual idiomaticity detection
and sentence embedding. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.10050 , 2022.
H Mann and D Whitney. Controlling the false discovery rate: A practical and powerful
approach to multiple testing. Ann. Math. Stat , 18(1):50–60, 1947.
Louis Martin, Benjamin Muller, Pedro Javier Ortiz Suárez, Yoann Dupont, Laurent Ro-
mary, Éric de la Clergerie, Djamé Seddah, and Benoˆ ıt Sagot. CamemBERT: a tasty
French language model. In Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics , pages 7203–7219, Online, July 2020. Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics. URL https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/2020.acl-main.645 .
AngelinaMcMillan-Major,ZaidAlyafeai,StellaBiderman,KimboChen,FrancescoDeToni,
Gérard Dupont, Hady Elsahar, Chris Emezue, Alham Fikri Aji, Suzana Ili´ c, Nurulaqilla
Khamis, Colin Leong, Maraim Masoud, Aitor Soroa, Pedro Ortiz Suarez, Zeerak Talat,
Daniel van Strien, and Yacine Jernite. Documenting geographically and contextually
diverse data sources: The bigscience catalogue of language data and resources, 2022.
URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2201.10066 .
Paulius Micikevicius, Sharan Narang, Jonah Alben, Gregory Diamos, Erich Elsen, David
Garcia, Boris Ginsburg, Michael Houston, Oleksii Kuchaiev, Ganesh Venkatesh, and Hao
Wu. Mixed precision training. In International Conference on Learning Representations ,
2018. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=r1gs9JgRZ .
Sabrina J. Mielke, Zaid Alyafeai, Elizabeth Salesky, Colin Raffel, Manan Dey, Matthias
Gallé, Arun Raja, Chenglei Si, Wilson Y. Lee, Benoˆ ıt Sagot, and Samson Tan. Between
words and characters: A brief history of open-vocabulary modeling and tokenization in
nlp, 2021. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2112.10508 .
Risto Miikkulainen and Michael G. Dyer. Natural language processing with modular pdp
networks and distributed lexicon. Cognitive Science , 15(3), 1991.
Tomas Mikolov, Martin Karafiát, Lukas Burget, Jan Cernockỳ, and Sanjeev Khudanpur.
Recurrent neural network based language model. In Interspeech , 2010.
Tomas Mikolov, Ilya Sutskever, Kai Chen, Greg S. Corrado, and Jeff Dean. Distributed
representations of words and phrases and their compositionality. Advances in neural
information processing systems , 26, 2013.
Margaret Mitchell, Simone Wu, Andrew Zaldivar, Parker Barnes, Lucy Vasserman, Ben
Hutchinson, Elena Spitzer, Inioluwa Deborah Raji, and Timnit Gebru. Model cards
for model reporting. In Proceedings of the Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and
Transparency , FAT* ’19, page 220–229, New York, NY, USA, 2019. Association for
Computing Machinery. ISBN 9781450361255. doi: 10.1145/3287560.3287596. URL
https://doi.org/10.1145/3287560.3287596 .
Anthony Moi, Pierric Cistac, Nicolas Patry, Evan P. Walsh, Funtowicz Morgan, Sebastian
P¨ utz, Thomas Wolf, Sylvain Gugger, Clément Delangue, Julien Chaumond, Lysandre
56BLOOM
Debut, and Patrick von Platen. Hugging face tokenizers library. https://github.com/
huggingface/tokenizers , 2019.
Nasrin Mostafazadeh, Michael Roth, Annie Louis, Nathanael Chambers, and James Allen.
Lsdsem 2017 shared task: The story cloze test. In Proceedings of the 2nd Workshop on
Linking Models of Lexical, Sentential and Discourse-level Semantics , pages 46–51, 2017.
Niklas Muennighoff. SGPT: GPT sentence embeddings for semantic search. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2202.08904 , 2022.
Niklas Muennighoff, Nouamane Tazi, Lo¨ ıc Magne, and Nils Reimers. MTEB: Massive text
embedding benchmark. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.07316 , 2022a.
Niklas Muennighoff, Thomas Wang, Lintang Sutawika, Adam Roberts, Stella Bider-
man, Teven Le Scao, M Saiful Bari, Sheng Shen, Zheng-Xin Yong, Hailey Schoelkopf,
et al. Crosslingual generalization through multitask finetuning. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2211.01786 , 2022b.
Nikita Nangia, Clara Vania, Rasika Bhalerao, and Samuel R. Bowman. CrowS-pairs:
A challenge dataset for measuring social biases in masked language models. In Pro-
ceedings of the 2020 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing
(EMNLP) , pages 1953–1967, Online, November 2020. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2020.emnlp-main.154. URL https://aclanthology.org/
2020.emnlp-main.154 .
Sharan Narang, Hyung Won Chung, Yi Tay, William Fedus, Thibault Fevry, Michael
Matena, Karishma Malkan, Noah Fiedel, Noam Shazeer, Zhenzhong Lan, Yanqi Zhou,
Wei Li, Nan Ding, Jake Marcus, Adam Roberts, and Colin Raffel. Do transformer mod-
ifications transfer across implementations and applications? In Conference on Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing , 2021.
Deepak Narayanan, Mohammad Shoeybi, Jared Casper, Patrick LeGresley, Mostofa Pat-
wary, Vijay Korthikanti, Dmitri Vainbrand, Prethvi Kashinkunti, Julie Bernauer, Bryan
Catanzaro, Amar Phanishayee, and Matei Zaharia. Efficient Large-Scale Language Model
Training on GPU Clusters using Megatron-LM. In Proceedings of the International Con-
ference for High Performance Computing, Networking, Storage and Analysis , 2021.
Wilhelmina Nekoto, Vukosi Marivate, Tshinondiwa Matsila, Timi E. Fasubaa, T Kolawole,
Taiwo Helen Fagbohungbe, Solomon Oluwole Akinola, Shamsuddeen Hassan Muham-
mad, Salomon Kabongo Kabenamualu, Salomey Osei, Sackey Freshia, Rubungo Andre
Niyongabo, Ricky Macharm, Perez Ogayo, Orevaoghene Ahia, Musie Meressa, Mofe-
toluwa Adeyemi, Masabata Mokgesi-Selinga, Lawrence Okegbemi, Laura Martinus, Ko-
lawole Tajudeen, Kevin Degila, Kelechi Ogueji, Kathleen Siminyu, Julia Kreutzer, Jason
Webster, Jamiil Toure Ali, Jade Z. Abbott, Iroro Orife, Ignatius U. Ezeani, Idris Ab-
dulkabir Dangana, Herman Kamper, Hady ElSahar, Goodness Duru, Ghollah Kioko, Es-
poir Murhabazi, Elan Van Biljon, Daniel Whitenack, Christopher Onyefuluchi, Chris C.
Emezue, Bonaventure F. P. Dossou, Blessing K. Sibanda, Blessing Itoro Bassey, Ayo-
dele Olabiyi, Arshath Ramkilowan, Alp Oktem, Adewale Akinfaderin, and Abdallah M.
57BigScience Workshop
Bashir. Participatory research for low-resourced machine translation: A case study in
African languages. In ACL Findings , 2020.
Aurélie Névéol, Yoann Dupont, Julien Bezan¸ con, and Kar¨ en Fort. French CrowS-pairs:
Extending a challenge dataset for measuring social bias in masked language mod-
els to a language other than English. In Proceedings of the 60th Annual Meeting of
the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 8521–
8531, Dublin, Ireland, May 2022. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi:
10.18653/v1/2022.acl-long.583. URL https://aclanthology.org/2022.acl-long.583 .
Joakim Nivre, Marie-Catherine de Marneffe, Filip Ginter, Yoav Goldberg, Jan Hajiˇ c,
Christopher D. Manning, Ryan McDonald, Slav Petrov, Sampo Pyysalo, Natalia Silveira,
Reut Tsarfaty, and Daniel Zeman. Universal Dependencies v1: A multilingual treebank
collection. In Proceedings of the Tenth International Conference on Language Resources
and Evaluation (LREC’16) , pages 1659–1666, Portoroˇ z, Slovenia, May 2016. European
Language Resources Association (ELRA). URL https://aclanthology.org/L16-1262 .
Joakim Nivre, Daniel Zeman, Filip Ginter, and Francis Tyers. Universal Dependencies.
InProceedings of the 15th Conference of the European Chapter of the Association for
Computational Linguistics: Tutorial Abstracts , Valencia, Spain, April 2017. Association
for Computational Linguistics. URL https://aclanthology.org/E17-5001 .
Pedro Javier Ortiz Suárez, Benoˆ ıt Sagot, and Laurent Romary. Asynchronous pipelines
for processing huge corpora on medium to low resource infrastructures. In Piotr
Ba´ nski, Adrien Barbaresi, Hanno Biber, Evelyn Breiteneder, Simon Clematide, Marc
Kupietz, Harald L¨ ungen, and Caroline Iliadi, editors, Proceedings of the Workshop on
Challenges in the Management of Large Corpora (CMLC-7) , pages 9 – 16, Cardiff,
UK, 2019. Leibniz-Institut f¨ ur Deutsche Sprache. doi: 10.14618/ids-pub-9021. URL
http://nbn-resolving.de/urn:nbn:de:bsz:mh39-90215 .
Kishore Papineni, Salim Roukos, Todd Ward, and Wei-Jing Zhu. BLEU: a method
for automatic evaluation of machine translation. In Proceedings of the 40th Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics , pages 311–318, Philadel-
phia, Pennsylvania, USA, July 2002. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi:
10.3115/1073083.1073135. URL https://aclanthology.org/P02-1040 .
David Patterson, Joseph Gonzalez, Quoc Le, Chen Liang, Lluis-Miquel Munguia, Daniel
Rothchild, David So, Maud Texier, and Jeff Dean. Carbon emissions and large neural
network training. arXiv preprint arXiv:2104.10350 , 2021.
Karl Pearson. Note on regression and inheritance in the case of two parents. Proceedings
of the Royal Society of London , 58(347-352):240–242, 1895.
MatthewE.Peters, MarkNeumann, MohitIyyer, MattGardner, ChristopherClark, Kenton
Lee, and Luke Zettlemoyer. Deep contextualized word representations. In Conference of
the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics , 2018.
58BLOOM
Jason Phang, Herbie Bradley, Leo Gao, Louis J Castricato, and Stella Biderman.
EleutherAI: going beyond "open science" to "science in the open". In Workshop on
Broadening Research Collaborations , 2022.
Matt Post. A call for clarity in reporting BLEU scores. In Proceedings of the Third Con-
ference on Machine Translation: Research Papers , pages 186–191, Brussels, Belgium,
October 2018. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/W18-6319.
URL https://aclanthology.org/W18-6319 .
Ofir Press, Noah Smith, and Mike Lewis. Train short, test long: Attention with linear
biases enables input length extrapolation. In International Conference on Learning Rep-
resentations , 2021.
Alec Radford, Karthik Narasimhan, Tim Salimans, and Ilya Sutskever. Improving language
understanding by generative pre-training, 2018.
Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, Rewon Child, David Luan, Dario Amodei, and Ilya Sutskever.
Language models are unsupervised multitask learners, 2019.
Jack W Rae, Sebastian Borgeaud, Trevor Cai, Katie Millican, Jordan Hoffmann, Francis
Song, John Aslanides, Sarah Henderson, Roman Ring, Susannah Young, et al. Scaling
language models: Methods, analysis & insights from training gopher. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2112.11446 , 2021.
Colin Raffel, Noam Shazeer, Adam Roberts, Katherine Lee, Sharan Narang, Michael
Matena, Yanqi Zhou, Wei Li, Peter J Liu, et al. Exploring the limits of transfer learning
with a unified text-to-text transformer. J. Mach. Learn. Res. , 21(140):1–67, 2020.
Samyam Rajbhandari, Jeff Rasley, Olatunji Ruwase, and Yuxiong He. ZeRO: Memory
optimizations toward training trillion parameter models. SC20: International Conference
for High Performance Computing, Networking, Storage and Analysis , Nov 2020. doi:
10.1109/sc41405.2020.00024. URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/SC41405.2020.00024 .
Deborah Raji, Emily Denton, Emily M. Bender, Alex Hanna, and Amanda-
lynne Paullada. Ai and the everything in the whole wide world bench-
mark. In J. Vanschoren and S. Yeung, editors, Proceedings of the Neural
Information Processing Systems Track on Datasets and Benchmarks , volume 1,
2021. URL https://datasets-benchmarks-proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2021/
file/084b6fbb10729ed4da8c3d3f5a3ae7c9-Paper-round2.pdf .
Inioluwa Deborah Raji, I. Elizabeth Kumar, Aaron Horowitz, and Andrew Selbst. The
fallacy of AI functionality. In 2022 ACM Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and
Transparency , FAccT ’22, page 959–972, New York, NY, USA, 2022. Association for
Computing Machinery. ISBN 9781450393522. doi: 10.1145/3531146.3533158. URL
https://doi.org/10.1145/3531146.3533158 .
Jeff Rasley, Samyam Rajbhandari, Olatunji Ruwase, and Yuxiong He. DeepSpeed: System
optimizations enable training deep learning models with over 100 billion parameters. In
Proceedings of the 26th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery
59BigScience Workshop
& Data Mining , KDD ’20, page 3505–3506, New York, NY, USA, 2020. Association
for Computing Machinery. ISBN 9781450379984. doi: 10.1145/3394486.3406703. URL
https://doi.org/10.1145/3394486.3406703 .
Phillip Rust, Jonas Pfeiffer, Ivan Vuli´ c, Sebastian Ruder, and Iryna Gurevych. How
good is your tokenizer? on the monolingual performance of multilingual language
models. In Proceedings of the 59th Annual Meeting of the Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics and the 11th International Joint Conference on Natural Language
Processing (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 3118–3135, Online, August 2021. Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2021.acl-long.243. URL https:
//aclanthology.org/2021.acl-long.243 .
Ali Safaya, Moutasem Abdullatif, and Deniz Yuret. KUISAIL at SemEval-2020 task
12: BERT-CNN for offensive speech identification in social media. In Proceedings of
the Fourteenth Workshop on Semantic Evaluation , pages 2054–2059, Barcelona (on-
line), December 2020. International Committee for Computational Linguistics. URL
https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/2020.semeval-1.271 .
Gerard Salton and Chung-Shu Yang. On the specification of term values in automatic
indexing. Journal of documentation , 1973.
Nithya Sambasivan, Shivani Kapania, Hannah Highfill, Diana Akrong, Praveen Paritosh,
and Lora M Aroyo. “everyone wants to do the model work, not the data work”: Data
cascades in high-stakes ai. In Proceedings of the 2021 CHI Conference on Human Factors
in Computing Systems , CHI ’21, New York, NY, USA, 2021. Association for Computing
Machinery. ISBN 9781450380966. doi: 10.1145/3411764.3445518. URL https://doi.
org/10.1145/3411764.3445518 .
Victor Sanh, Albert Webson, Colin Raffel, Stephen Bach, Lintang Sutawika, Zaid Alyafeai,
Antoine Chaffin, Arnaud Stiegler, Arun Raja, Manan Dey, M Saiful Bari, Canwen Xu,
Urmish Thakker, Shanya Sharma Sharma, Eliza Szczechla, Taewoon Kim, Gunjan Chh-
ablani, Nihal Nayak, Debajyoti Datta, Jonathan Chang, Mike Tian-Jian Jiang, Han
Wang, Matteo Manica, Sheng Shen, Zheng Xin Yong, Harshit Pandey, Rachel Baw-
den, Thomas Wang, Trishala Neeraj, Jos Rozen, Abheesht Sharma, Andrea Santilli,
Thibault Fevry, Jason Alan Fries, Ryan Teehan, Teven Le Scao, Stella Biderman, Leo
Gao, Thomas Wolf, and Alexander M Rush. Multitask prompted training enables zero-
shot task generalization. In International Conference on Learning Representations , 2022.
URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=9Vrb9D0WI4 .
J¨ urgen Schmidhuber and Stefan Heil. Sequential neural text compression. IEEE Transac-
tions on Neural Networks , 7(1), 1996.
Roy Schwartz, Jesse Dodge, Noah A. Smith, and Oren Etzioni. Green ai. Communications
of the ACM , 63(12), 2020.
Oleg Serikov, Vitaly Protasov, Ekaterina Voloshina, Viktoria Knyazkova, and Tatiana Shav-
rina. Universal and independent: Multilingual probing framework for exhaustive model
interpretation and evaluation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.13236 , 2022.
60BLOOM
Claude Elwood Shannon. A mathematical theory of communication. The Bell system
technical journal , 27(3), 1948.
Noam Shazeer. GLU variants improve transformer. arXiv preprint arXiv:2002.05202 , 2020.
Noam Shazeer, Azalia Mirhoseini, Krzysztof Maziarz, Andy Davis, Quoc Le, Geoffrey Hin-
ton, and Jeff Dean. Outrageously large neural networks: The sparsely-gated mixture-
of-experts layer. In International Conference on Learning Representations , 2017. URL
https://openreview.net/forum?id=B1ckMDqlg .
Oleh Shliazhko, Alena Fenogenova, Maria Tikhonova, Vladislav Mikhailov, Anastasia Ko-
zlova, and Tatiana Shavrina. mgpt: Few-shot learners go multilingual. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2204.07580 , 2022.
Mohammad Shoeybi, Mostofa Patwary, Raul Puri, Patrick LeGresley, Jared Casper, and
Bryan Catanzaro. Megatron-LM: Training multi-billion parameter language models using
model parallelism. arXiv preprint arXiv:1909.08053 , 2019.
Antoine Simoulin and Benoit Crabbé. Un modèle Transformer Génératif Pré-entrainé
pour le ______ fran¸ cais. In Pascal Denis, Natalia Grabar, Amel Fraisse, Rémi Car-
don, Bernard Jacquemin, Eric Kergosien, and Antonio Balvet, editors, Traitement Au-
tomatique des Langues Naturelles , pages 246–255, Lille, France, 2021. ATALA. URL
https://hal.archives-ouvertes.fr/hal-03265900 .
ShadenSmith, MostofaPatwary, BrandonNorick, PatrickLeGresley, SamyamRajbhandari,
Jared Casper, Zhun Liu, Shrimai Prabhumoye, George Zerveas, Vijay Korthikanti, Elton
Zhang, Rewon Child, Reza Yazdani Aminabadi, Julie Bernauer, Xia Song, Mohammad
Shoeybi, Yuxiong He, Michael Houston, Saurabh Tiwary, and Bryan Catanzaro. Using
DeepSpeed and Megatron to train Megatron-Turing NLG 530B, a large-scale generative
language model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2201.11990 , 2022.
Saleh Soltan, Shankar Ananthakrishnan, Jack FitzGerald, Rahul Gupta, Wael Hamza,
Haidar Khan, Charith Peris, Stephen Rawls, Andy Rosenbaum, Anna Rumshisky, Chan-
dana Satya Prakash, Mukund Sridhar, Fabian Triefenbach, Apurv Verma, Gokhan Tur,
and Prem Natarajan. Alexatm 20b: Few-shot learning using a large-scale multilingual
seq2seq model, 2022. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2208.01448 .
Aarohi Srivastava, Abhinav Rastogi, Abhishek Rao, Abu Awal Md Shoeb, Abubakar Abid,
Adam Fisch, Adam R Brown, Adam Santoro, Aditya Gupta, Adrià Garriga-Alonso, et al.
Beyond the imitation game: Quantifying and extrapolating the capabilities of language
models.arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.04615 , 2022.
Emma Strubell, Ananya Ganesh, and Andrew McCallum. Energy and policy considera-
tions for deep learning in nlp. In Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics , 2019.
Jianlin Su, Yu Lu, Shengfeng Pan, Bo Wen, and Yunfeng Liu. RoFormer: Enhanced
transformer with rotary position embedding. arXiv preprint arXiv:2104.09864 , 2021.
61BigScience Workshop
Ilya Sutskever, James Martens, and Geoffrey E. Hinton. Generating text with recurrent
neural networks. In International Conference on Machine Learning , 2011.
Zeerak Talat, Aurélie Névéol, Stella Biderman, Miruna Clinciu, Manan Dey, Shayne Long-
pre, Sasha Luccioni, Maraim Masoud, Margaret Mitchell, Dragomir Radev, Shanya
Sharma, Arjun Subramonian, Jaesung Tae, Samson Tan, Deepak Tunuguntla, and Oskar
van der Wal. You reap what you sow: On the challenges of bias evaluation under multi-
lingual settings. In Challenges & Perspectives in Creating Large Language Models , 2022.
URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=rK-7NhfSIW5 .
Yi Tay, Jason Wei, Hyung Won Chung, Vinh Q Tran, David R So, Siamak Shakeri, Xavier
Garcia, Huaixiu Steven Zheng, Jinfeng Rao, Aakanksha Chowdhery, et al. Transcending
scaling laws with 0.1% extra compute. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.11399 , 2022.
Ryan Teehan, Miruna Clinciu, Oleg Serikov, Eliza Szczechla, Natasha Seelam, Shachar
Mirkin, and Aaron Gokaslan. Emergent structures and training dynamics in large lan-
guage models. In Proceedings of BigScience Episode #5 – Workshop on Challenges &
Perspectives in Creating Large Language Models , pages 146–159, virtual+Dublin, May
2022. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2022.bigscience-1.11.
URL https://aclanthology.org/2022.bigscience-1.11 .
Ian Tenney, Patrick Xia, Berlin Chen, Alex Wang, Adam Poliak, R Thomas McCoy, Na-
joung Kim, Benjamin Van Durme, Samuel R Bowman, Dipanjan Das, et al. What do
you learn from context? probing for sentence structure in contextualized word represen-
tations. In International Conference on Learning Representations , 2018.
Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N
Gomez,  Lukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. Advances in
neural information processing systems , 30, 2017.
Oriol Vinyals and Quoc V. Le. A neural conversational model. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1506.05869 , 2015.
Ekaterina Voloshina, Oleg Serikov, and Tatiana Shavrina. Is neural language acquisition
similar to natural? a chronological probing study. arXiv preprint arXiv:2207.00560 , 2022.
Alex Wang, Yada Pruksachatkun, Nikita Nangia, Amanpreet Singh, Julian Michael, Felix
Hill, Omer Levy, and Samuel Bowman. Superglue: A stickier benchmark for general-
purpose language understanding systems. In H. Wallach, H. Larochelle, A. Beygelzimer,
F. d'Alché-Buc, E. Fox, and R. Garnett, editors, Advances in Neural Information Pro-
cessing Systems , volume 32. Curran Associates, Inc., 2019. URL https://proceedings.
neurips.cc/paper/2019/file/4496bf24afe7fab6f046bf4923da8de6-Paper.pdf .
Ben Wang and Aran Komatsuzaki. GPT-J-6B: A 6 billion parameter autoregressive lan-
guage model, 2021.
Changhan Wang, Kyunghyun Cho, and Jiatao Gu. Neural machine translation with byte-
level subwords. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence , 2020.
62BLOOM
Shibo Wang and Pankaj Kanwar. Bfloat16: The secret to high performance on cloud
tpus, 2019. URL https://cloud.google.com/blog/products/ai-machine-learning/
bfloat16-the-secret-to-high-performance-on-cloud-tpus .
Shuohuan Wang, Yu Sun, Yang Xiang, Zhihua Wu, Siyu Ding, Weibao Gong, Shikun Feng,
Junyuan Shang, Yanbin Zhao, Chao Pang, Jiaxiang Liu, Xuyi Chen, Yuxiang Lu, Weixin
Liu, Xi Wang, Yangfan Bai, Qiuliang Chen, Li Zhao, Shiyong Li, Peng Sun, Dianhai Yu,
YanjunMa, HaoTian, HuaWu, TianWu, WeiZeng, GeLi, WenGao, andHaifengWang.
Ernie 3.0 titan: Exploring larger-scale knowledge enhanced pre-training for language
understanding and generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.12731 , 2021.
Thomas Wang, Adam Roberts, Daniel Hesslow, Teven Le Scao, Hyung Won Chung, Iz Belt-
agy, Julien Launay, and Colin Raffel. What language model architecture and pretraining
objective works best for zero-shot generalization? In Kamalika Chaudhuri, Stefanie
Jegelka, Le Song, Csaba Szepesvari, Gang Niu, and Sivan Sabato, editors, Proceed-
ings of the 39th International Conference on Machine Learning , volume 162 of Proceed-
ings of Machine Learning Research , pages 22964–22984. PMLR, 17–23 Jul 2022a. URL
https://proceedings.mlr.press/v162/wang22u.html .
Yizhong Wang, Swaroop Mishra, Pegah Alipoormolabashi, Yeganeh Kordi, Amirreza
Mirzaei, Anjana Arunkumar, Arjun Ashok, Arut Selvan Dhanasekaran, Atharva Naik,
David Stap, et al. Benchmarking generalization via in-context instructions on 1,600+
language tasks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.07705 , 2022b.
Jason Wei, Maarten Bosma, Vincent Y Zhao, Kelvin Guu, Adams Wei Yu, Brian Lester,
Nan Du, Andrew M Dai, and Quoc V Le. Finetuned language models are zero-shot
learners. arXiv preprint arXiv:2109.01652 , 2021.
Jason Wei, Yi Tay, Rishi Bommasani, Colin Raffel, Barret Zoph, Sebastian Borgeaud,
Dani Yogatama, Maarten Bosma, Denny Zhou, Donald Metzler, Ed H. Chi, Tatsunori
Hashimoto, Oriol Vinyals, Percy Liang, Jeff Dean, and William Fedus. Emergent abilities
of large language models. Transactions on Machine Learning Research , 2022.
Laura S. Westra and Bill E. Lawson. Faces of Environmental Racism: Confronting Issues
of Global Justice . Rowman & Littlefield Publishers, 2001.
Langdon Winner. Technology as master. (book reviews: Autonomous technology. technics-
out-of-control as a theme in political thought). Science, 1977.
LangdonWinner. Doartifactshavepolitics? In Computer Ethics ,pages177–192.Routledge,
2017.
Andrew Wong, Erkin Otles, John P. Donnelly, Andrew Krumm, Jeffrey McCullough, Olivia
DeTroyer-Cooley, Justin Pestrue, Marie Phillips, Judy Konye, Carleen Penoza, Muham-
mad Ghous, and Karandeep Singh. External Validation of a Widely Implemented Pro-
prietary Sepsis Prediction Model in Hospitalized Patients. JAMA Internal Medicine , 181
(8):1065–1070, 08 2021. ISSN 2168-6106. doi: 10.1001/jamainternmed.2021.2626. URL
https://doi.org/10.1001/jamainternmed.2021.2626 .
63BigScience Workshop
Haicheng Wu, Gregory Diamos, Jin Wang, Srihari Cadambi, Sudhakar Yalamanchili, and
Srimat Chakradhar. Optimizing data warehousing applications for GPUs using kernel
fusion/fission. In 2012 IEEE 26th International Parallel and Distributed Processing Sym-
posium Workshops and PhD Forum , pages 2433–2442, 2012. doi: 10.1109/IPDPSW.2012.
300.
Linting Xue, Noah Constant, Adam Roberts, Mihir Kale, Rami Al-Rfou, Aditya Siddhant,
Aditya Barua, and Colin Raffel. mT5: A massively multilingual pre-trained text-to-text
transformer. In Proceedings of the 2021 Conference of the North American Chapter of the
Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies , pages 483–
498, Online, June 2021. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/
2021.naacl-main.41. URL https://aclanthology.org/2021.naacl-main.41 .
Zhilin Yang, Zihang Dai, Yiming Yang, Jaime Carbonell, Ruslan Salakhutdinov, and
Quoc V. Le. XLnet: Generalized autoregressive pretraining for language understand-
ing.Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 2019.
Aohan Zeng, Xiao Liu, Zhengxiao Du, Zihan Wang, Hanyu Lai, Ming Ding, Zhuoyi Yang,
Yifan Xu, Wendi Zheng, Xiao Xia, et al. Glm-130b: An open bilingual pre-trained model.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.02414 , 2022.
Wei Zeng, Xiaozhe Ren, Teng Su, Hui Wang, Yi Liao, Zhiwei Wang, Xin Jiang, ZhenZhang
Yang, Kaisheng Wang, Xiaoda Zhang, Chen Li, Ziyan Gong, Yifan Yao, Xinjing Huang,
Jun Wang, Jianfeng Yu, Qi Guo, Yue Yu, Yan Zhang, Jin Wang, Hengtao Tao, Dasen
Yan, Zexuan Yi, Fang Peng, Fangqing Jiang, Han Zhang, Lingfeng Deng, Yehong Zhang,
Zhe Lin, Chao Zhang, Shaojie Zhang, Mingyue Guo, Shanzhi Gu, Gaojun Fan, Yaowei
Wang, Xuefeng Jin, Qun Liu, and Yonghong Tian. PanGu- α: Large-scale autoregres-
sive pretrained Chinese language models with auto-parallel computation. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2104.12369 , 2021.
Susan Zhang, Stephen Roller, Naman Goyal, Mikel Artetxe, Moya Chen, Shuohui Chen,
Christopher Dewan, Mona Diab, Xian Li, Xi Victoria Lin, et al. OPT: Open pre-trained
transformer language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.01068 , 2022.
Yian Zhang, Alex Warstadt, Xiaocheng Li, and Samuel R. Bowman. When do you need
billions of words of pretraining data? In Proceedings of the 59th Annual Meeting of the
Association for Computational Linguistics and the 11th International Joint Conference on
Natural Language Processing (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 1112–1125, Online, August
2021.AssociationforComputationalLinguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2021.acl-long.90. URL
https://aclanthology.org/2021.acl-long.90 .
Zhengyan Zhang, Xu Han, Zhiyuan Liu, Xin Jiang, Maosong Sun, and Qun Liu. ERNIE:
Enhanced language representation with informative entities. In Annual Meeting of the
Association for Computational Linguistics , 2019.
64BLOOM
Appendix A. Prompts
The following contains prompts used for evaluation. The prompts are also available in
PromptSource (Bach et al., 2022). A sample with a prompt applied as well as the raw
prompts are provided. For raw prompts, double curly brackets are filled with content from
the sample when used.
Contents
A.1 SuperGLUE/wsc.fixed . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 66
A.1.1 Data example . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 66
A.1.2 Prompts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 66
A.2 SuperGLUE/wic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 66
A.2.1 Data example . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 66
A.2.2 Prompts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 67
A.3 SuperGLUE/boolq . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 67
A.3.1 Data example . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 67
A.3.2 Prompts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 67
A.4 SuperGLUE/axb & SuperGLUE/axg . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 68
A.4.1 Data example . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 68
A.4.2 Prompts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 68
A.5 XNLI & SuperGLUE/CB . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 68
A.5.1 Data example . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 68
A.5.2 Prompts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 69
A.6 XWinograd . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 69
A.6.1 Data example . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 69
A.6.2 Prompts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 69
A.7 XCOPA & SuperGLUE/COPA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 70
A.7.1 Data example . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 70
A.7.2 Prompts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 70
A.8 XStoryCloze & Story Cloze . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 71
A.8.1 Data example . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 71
A.8.2 Prompts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 71
A.9 WMT . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 71
A.9.1 Data example . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 71
A.9.2 Prompts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 72
A.10 DiaBLa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 72
A.10.1 Data example . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 72
A.10.2 Prompt . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 72
A.11 Flores-101 (MT) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 72
A.11.1 Data example . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 73
A.11.2 Prompt . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 73
A.12 CrowS-Pairs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 73
A.12.1 Data example . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 73
A.12.2 Prompts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 73
65BigScience Workshop
A.1 SuperGLUE/wsc.fixed
A.1.1 Data example
Prompt name: GPT-3 Style
Passage: I tried to paint a picture of an orchard, with lemons in the lemon
trees , but they came out looking more like light bulbs.\n\nQuestion: In the
passage above, does the pronoun "they" refer to lemon trees?
Answer:No
A.1.2 Prompts
GPT-3 Style
Passage: {{ text }} \n\nQuestion: In the passage above, does the pronoun
"{{ span2_text }}" refer to {{ span1_text }}?\n\nAnswer:
replaced with
{{ text }} In the previous sentence, can the pronoun "{{ span2_text }}"
be replaced with "{{ span1_text }}"? Yes or no?
the pronoun refers to
{{ text }} \nIn the passage above, the pronoun "{{ span2_text }}" refers to
{{ span1_text }}. True or false?
does p stand for
{{ text }} Here, does "{{ span2_text.lower() }}" stand for {{ span1_text }}?
Yes or no?
the pronoun refers to
{{ text }} \nIn the passage above, the pronoun "{{ span2_text }}" refers to
{{ span1_text }}. True or false?
A.2 SuperGLUE/wic
A.2.1 Data example
Prompt name: GPT-3 Style
As he called the role he put a check mark by each student’s name.
\n\nA check on its dependability under stress.\n\nQuestion: Is the
word ’check’ used in the same sense in the two sentences above?
66BLOOM
A.2.2 Prompts
GPT-3 Style
{{sentence1}}\n\n{{sentence2}}\n\nQuestion: Is the word ’’{{word}}’’
used in the same sense in the two sentences above?
question-context-meaning-with-label
Does the word "{{word}}" have the same meaning in these two sentences?
Yes, No?\n\n{{sentence1}}\n\n{{sentence2}}
GPT-3-prompt-with-label
{sentence1}}\n\n{{sentence2}}\n\nQuestion: Is the word ’’{{word}}’’ used
in the same sense in the two sentences above? Yes, No?
polysemous
The word "{{word}}" has multiple meanings. Does it have the same meaning in
sentences 1 and 2? Yes or no? Sentence 1: {{sentence1}} Sentence 2:
{{sentence2}}
similar-sense
{{sentence1}}\n\n{{sentence2}}\n\nSimilar sense of {{word}}?
A.3 SuperGLUE/boolq
A.3.1 Data example
Prompt name: GPT-3 Style
Phantom pain -- Phantom pain sensations are described as perceptions that an
individual experiences relating to a limb or an organ that is not physically
part of the body. Limb loss is a result of either removal by amputation or
congenital limb deficiency. However, phantom limb sensations can also occur
following nerve avulsion or spinal cord injury.\nQuestion: is pain experienced
in a missing body part or paralyzed area\nAnswer:
Answer:Yes
A.3.2 Prompts
GPT-3 Style
{{ passage }} \nQuestion: {{ question }}\nAnswer:
yes_no_question
Text: {{passage}}\n\nAnswer the following yes/no question:
{{question}}? Yes or no?
67BigScience Workshop
exam
EXAM\n1. Answer by yes or no.\n\nDocument: {{passage}}\n
Question: {{question}}?
based on the following passage
Based on the following passage, {{ question }}? {{ passage }}
could you tell me...
{ passage }} \n\nHaving read that, could you tell me {{ question }}?
A.4 SuperGLUE/axb & SuperGLUE/axg
A.4.1 Data example
Prompt name: GPT-3 style
The taxpayer met with the accountant to get help filing his taxes.\n\n
Question: The accountant sought help filing taxes. True or False?
Answer:False
A.4.2 Prompts
GPT-3 style
{{sentence1}}\n\nQuestion: {{sentence2}} True or False?
MNLI Crowdsource
{{sentence1}} Using only the above description and what you know about
the world, is "{{sentence2}}" definitely correct? Yes or no?
can we infer
Suppose {{sentence1}} Can we infer that "{{sentence2}}"? Yes or no?
guaranteed true
Given {{sentence1}} Is it guaranteed true that "{{sentence2}}"? Yes or no?
justified in saying
{{sentence1}} Are we justified in saying that "{{sentence2}}"? Yes or no?
A.5 XNLI & SuperGLUE/CB
A.5.1 Data example
Prompt name: GPT-3 style
Well, I wasn’t even thinking about that, but I was so frustrated, and, I ended up
talking to him again.\n\nQuestion: I havent spoken to him again. True, False, or
Neither?
Answer:False
68BLOOM
A.5.2 Prompts
GPT-3 style
{{premise}}\n\nQuestion: {{hypothesis}} True, False, or Neither?
MNLI crowdsource
{{premise}} Using only the above description and what you know about the world,
"{{hypothesis}}" is definitely correct, incorrect, or inconclusive?
can we infer
Suppose {{premise}} Can we infer that "{{hypothesis}}"? Yes, no, or maybe?
guaranteed/possible/impossible
Assume it is true that {{premise}} \n\nTherefore, \"{{hypothesis}}\" is
{{\"guaranteed\"}}, {{\"possible\"}}, or {{\"impossible\"}}?
justified in saying
{{premise}} Are we justified in saying that "{{hypothesis}}"? Yes, no,
or maybe?
A.6 XWinograd
A.6.1 Data example
Prompt name: Replace
The city councilmen refused the demonstrators a permit because _ feared
violence.\nReplace the _ in the above sentence with the correct option:
\n- the demonstrators\n- The city councilmen
Answer:The city councilmen
A.6.2 Prompts
Replace
{{sentence}}\nReplace the _ in the above sentence with the correct option:
\n- {{option1}}\n- {{option2}}
True or False
The _ in the sentence below refers to {{option1}}. True or False?
{{sentence}}
does underscore refer to
{{sentence}} In the previous sentence, does _ refer to
{{ option1 }} or {{ option2 }}?
69BigScience Workshop
underscore refer to
{{sentence}}\n What does the _ in the above sentence refer to?
{{ option1 }} or {{ option2 }}?
stand for
In the sentence below, does the _ stand for {{answer_choices[0]}} or
{{answer_choices[1]}}? {{sentence}}
A.7 XCOPA & SuperGLUE/COPA
A.7.1 Data example
Prompt name: C1 or C2? premise, so/because...
"It was fragile." or "It was small."? The item was packaged in bubble wrap.
because
Answer:It was fragile.
A.7.2 Prompts
C1 or C2? premise, so/because...
{{ answer_choices[0] }}" or "{{ answer_choices[1] }}"? {{ premise }}
{% if question == "cause" %} because {% else %} so {% endif %}
best_option
{{ premise }} \n\nWhat’s the best option?\n- {{choice1}}\n- {{choice2}}\n\
\nWe are looking for {% if question == \"cause\" %} a cause {% else %}
an effect {% endif %}
cause_effect
{{ premise }}\nSelect the most plausible {% if question == "cause" %} cause:
{% else %} effect: {% endif %}\n- {{choice1}}\n- {{choice2}}
i_am_hesitating
{{ premise }} \n\nI am hesitating between two options. Help me choose the
more likely {% if question == \"cause\" %} cause: {% else %}
effect: {% endif %}\n- {{choice1}}\n- {{choice2}}
plausible_alternatives
{{ premise }} {% if question == "cause" %} This happened because...
{% else %} As a consequence... {% endif %} Help me pick the more
plausible option:\n- {{choice1}}\n- {{choice2}}
70BLOOM
A.8 XStoryCloze & Story Cloze
A.8.1 Data example
XStoryCloze and Story Cloze are not publicly available datasets. Please contact the authors
of Lin et al. (2021) for XStoryCloze and Mostafazadeh et al. (2017) for Story Cloze samples.
A.8.2 Prompts
Answer Given options
{{input_sentence_1}} {{input_sentence_2}} {{input_sentence_3}}
{{input_sentence_4}} What is a possible continuation for the story
given the following options ? - {{answer_choices | join("\n- ")}}
Choose Story Ending
Read the following story :\n\n{{input_sentence_1}}\n{{input_sentence_2}}\n
{{input_sentence_3}}\n{{input_sentence_4}}\n\nChoose a possible ending for the
previous story from the following options: \n- {{answer_choices | join(\"\\\n- \")}}
Story Continuation and Options
What is a possible continuation for the following story ? \n\n{{input_sentence_1}}
\n\{{input_sentence_2}}\n{{input_sentence_3}}\n{{input_sentence_4}}\n\nChoose from
the following options:\n- {{answer_choices | join(\"\\n- \")}}
Generate Ending
Generate a possible ending for the following story: {{input_sentence_1}}
{{input_sentence_2}} {{input_sentence_3}} {{input_sentence_4}}
Novel Correct Ending
I read the following novel: {{input_sentence_1}} {{input_sentence_2}}
{{input_sentence_3}} {{input_sentence_4}} What do you think is the most probable
ending? You can choose from the following options: - {{answer_choices | join("\n-")}}
A.9 WMT
Prompts for Section 4.3.1, where we compare prompts in both zero-shot and 1-shot settings
for four language directions (en ↔{hi,fr}).
A.9.1 Data example
The prompt names and content are specific to the language direction. The prompts below
each exist in four versions, where “l1” and “l2” are replaced by the language codes of the
source and target languages respectively (en, fr or hi) and “L1” and “L2” are replaced by the
language names of the source and target languages respectively (English, French or Hindi).
Prompt name: a_good_translation-l1-l2-source+target
Given the following source text in English: Spectacular Wingsuit Jump Over
Bogota , a good French translation is:
Answer:Spectaculaire saut en "wingsuit" au-dessus de Bogota
71BigScience Workshop
A.9.2 Prompts
a_good_translation-l1-l2-source+target
Given the following source text in L1: {{translation[l1]}} , a
good L2 translation is: ||| {{translation[l2]}}
gpt-3-l1-l2-target
Q: What is the {{L2}} translation of {{translation[l2]}} A:
version-l1-l2-target
If the original version says: {{translation[l1]}}; then the L2
version should say:
xglm-l1-l2-source+target
{{L1}}: {{translation[l1]}} = {{L2}}:
A.10 DiaBLa
Prompts for contextual MT results shown in Table 7.
A.10.1 Data example
Prompt name: xglm-source+target
English: We appear to have stopped moving. = French:
Answer:J’ai l’impression qu’on s’est arrêtés.
A.10.2 Prompt
xglm-source+target
{% set trg_lang ="French" %}{% set src_lang ="English" %}
{% if utterance_meta.lang == "french" %}
{% set trg_lang = "English" %}{% set src_lang = "French" %}
{% endif %}
{{ src_lang }}: {{ orig }} = {{ trg_lang }}: ||| {{ ref }}
The dialogue set is bilingual (between native English and native French speakers). In
few-shotsetups,few-shotexamplesarebydefaultineitherlanguagedirection(English →French
or French →English) regardless of the direction of the current example. We implemented
someadditionalDiaBLatasksthatcontrolthelanguagedirectionofthefew-shotexampleto
bethesameortheoppositedirectiontothecurrentexample( diabla_1_shot_context_same
anddiabla_1_shot_context_opposite ).
A.11 Flores-101 (MT)
The prompts are specific to each language pair as indicated by the source and target lan-
guages in the prompt name. Below is an example for French →Catalan translation.
72BLOOM
A.11.1 Data example
Prompt name: xglm-French-Catalan-source+target
French: L’aménagement vieillot, l’absence d’équipements récents et un certain
charme à l’ancienne font également partie de leur caractère. = Catalan: |||
Els accessoris vintage, la manca de les comoditats modernes i un cert envelliment
elegant també formen part del seu caràcter
A.11.2 Prompt
xglm-French-Catalan-source+target
French: {{ sentence_fra }} = Catalan: ||| {{ sentence_cat }}
A.12 CrowS-Pairs
A.12.1 Data example
Sentence A: He couldn’t figure out the issue with the rope, but he tried not to get
too down on himself, most black kids don’t have the best education growing up.\n
Sentence B: He couldn’t figure out the issue with the rope, but he tried not to get
too down on himself, most white kids don’t have the best education growing up.\n
Select the option that is the most plausible:\n- Sentence A demonstrates
a stereotype\n- Sentence B violates a stereotype
Answer:Sentence A demonstrates a stereotype
A.12.2 Prompts
demontraste_or_violate
Sentence A: {{sent_more}}\nSentence B: {{sent_less}}\nSelect the option
that is the most plausible:\n- {{answer_choices[0]}}\n- {{answer_choices[1]}}
73